## Treating Smart Pointers Like Regular References with the Deref Trait

Implementing the `Deref` trait allows you to customize the behavior of the
dereference operator `*`. And it can be done in a way that smart pointers can
be treated like regular ones, meaning that code for both smart pointers and
references can apply to each other.
- Rust’s *deref coercion* feature is what lets us work with either references
  or smart pointers.
  
### Defining Our Own Smart Pointer

`Box<T>` type is ultimately defined as a tuple struct with one element, so lets define `MyBox<T>` type the same way (with a `new` function as well).
```rust
struct MyBox<T>(T);

impl<T> MyBox<T> {
    fn new(x: T) -> MyBox<T> {
        MyBox(x)
    }
}
```

If we try the following code, it won't compile
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;
    let y = MyBox::new(x);

    assert_eq!(5, x);
    assert_eq!(5, *y);  // <--- this line is the problem
}
```
because of the `*` operand doesn't work on `MyBox` yet.

### Treating a Type Like a Reference by Implementing the Deref Trait

```rust
use std::ops::Deref;

impl<T> Deref for MyBox<T> {
    type Target = T;

    fn deref(&self) -> &Self::Target {
        &self.0
    }
}
```
- `type Target = T;` syntax defines an associated type for the `Deref` trait to
  use.
- the line `&self.0` is how we access the data inside the tuple struct as a
  reference.

It turns out that `*` operand actually calls on the `deref` method implemented
for `Deref` trait.
- The `deref` method gives the compiler the ability to take a value of any type
  that implements `Deref` and call the `deref` method to get a `&` reference
  that it knows how to dereference. Which means that
```rust
*y == *(y.deref())
```

### Implicit Deref Coercions with Functions and Methods

***Deref coercion*** converts a reference to a type that implements the `Deref`
trait into a reference to another type.
- deref coercion can convert `&String` to `&str` because `String`
  implements the `Deref` trait such that it returns `&str`.
  
Consider the function `hello`:
```rust
fn hello(name: &str) {
  println!("Hello, {name}"!);
}
```
Because of deref coercion, we can use a reference to `MyBox<String>` as the
argument for `hello`:
```rust
fn main() {
  let m = MyBox::new(String::from("Rust"));
  hello(&m);
}
```
- how `m` is coerced: `&m` -> `&MyBox<String>` -> `&String` -> `&str`.
  - The standard library provides an implementation of `Deref` on `String` that
    returns a string slice `&str` by calling `deref`.
    


When the `Deref` trait is defined for types involved, Rust will analyze the
types and use `Deref::deref` as many times as necessary to get a reference to
match the parameter’s type. The number of times that `Deref::deref` needs to be
called is resolved at compile time, so there's no runtime penalty from deref
coercion!

### How Deref Coercion Interacts with Mutability

Now with respect to mutable references, we can implement the `DerefMut` trait
on custom objects. It can be used to override the `*` operator on mutable
references.

Rust does deref coercion when it finds types and trait implementations in three
cases:
- From `&T` to `&U` when `T: Deref<Target=U>`
- From `&mut T` to `&mut U` when `T: DerefMut<Target=U>`
- From `&mut T` to `&U` when `T: Deref<Target=U>`
  - Rust will also coerce a mutable reference to an immutable one. Converting
    one mutable reference to one immutable reference will never break the
    borrowing rules.
