## Running Code on Cleanup with the Drop Trait

The second trait important for smart pointers is `Drop`, which lets you decide
what happens when a value is about to go out of scope. You can provide an
implementation for the `Drop` trait on any type, and that code can be used to
release resources like files or network connections.
- the functionality of the `Drop` trait is almost always used when implementing
  a smart pointer
  
In Rust, you can specify that certain code be run whenever a value goes out of
scope, and the compiler will insert this code automatically. As a result, we
don't need to be careful about placing cleanup code everywhere in a program.
- In some languages, the programmer must call code to free memory or resources
  every time they finish using an instance of certain types.
  
The `Drop` trait requires you to implement one method named drop that takes a
mutable reference to self.

```rust
struct CustomSmartPointer {
    data: String,
}

impl Drop for CustomSmartPointer {
    fn drop(&mut self) {
        // won't actually drop anything, this just shows when something would be dropped
        println!("Dropping CustomSmartPointer with data `{}`!", self.data);
    }
}

fn main() {
    let c = CustomSmartPointer {
        data: String::from("my stuff"),
    };
    let d = CustomSmartPointer {
        data: String::from("other stuff"),
    };
    println!("CustomSmartPointers created.");
    // after the println!, d is dropped, and then c is dropped.
}
```
```
CustomSmartPointers created.
Dropping CustomSmartPointer with data `other stuff`!
Dropping CustomSmartPointer with data `my stuff`!
```
- Rust automatically called `drop` for us when our instances went out of scope,
  calling the code we specified.
- Variables are dropped in the reverse order of their creation, so `d` was
  dropped before `c`. 
  
### Dropping a Value Early with std::mem::drop

The whole point of the `Drop` trait is that it’s taken care of automatically.
Occasionally, however, you might want to clean up a value early.
- For example, when using smart pointers that manage locks: you might want to
  force the `drop` method that releases the lock so that other code in the same
  scope can acquire the lock.
  
Rust doesn't let us call `Drop` trait's `drop` method manually. Instead we need
to call `std::mem::drop`.
- `std::mem::drop` is included in the prelude, so we don't need to bring it in
  with a `use`.

So if we want to clean up some value early, we CANNOT call `val_name.drop()`.
Instead call `drop(val_name)`. For example:
```rust
fn main() {
    let c = CustomSmartPointer {
        data: String::from("some data"),
    };
    println!("CustomSmartPointer created.");
    drop(c);  // <--- will now print "Dropping CustomSmartPointer with data `some data`!"
    println!("CustomSmartPointer dropped before the end of main.");
}
```
```
CustomSmartPointer created.
Dropping CustomSmartPointer with data `some data`!
CustomSmartPointer dropped before the end of main.
```
