## RefCell\<T\> and the Interior Mutability Pattern

***Interior mutability*** is a design pattern in Rust that allows you to mutate
data even when there's immutable references to that data (normally not allowed
b/c of the borrowing rules).

To mutate data, the pattern uses `unsafe` code inside a data structure to bend
Rust's rules that govern mutation and borrowing. Unsafe code indicates to the
compiler that we're checking the rules manually instead of relying on the
compiler to do them.

Types utilizing interior mutability pattern can only be used if it's ensured
that the borrowing rules will be followed at runtime, even though the compiler
can't guarantee that. The `unsafe` code involved is then wrapped in a safe API,
and the outer type is still immutable.
- `RefCell<T>` is one of these types that follow the interior mutability
  pattern.
  
### Enforcing Borrowing Rules at Runtime with RefCell\<T\>

`RefCell<T>` represents single ownership of the data it holds. So why is it
different from `Box<T>`? Recall the following borrowing rules
- At any given time, you can have *either* (but not both) one mutable reference
  or any number of immutable references.
- References must always be valid.

With references and `Box<T>`, the borrowing rules' invariants are enforced at
compile time. Whereas with `RefCell<T>`, these invariants are enforced at
runtime. If you break these rules with references, you'll get a compiler error.
But if you break these rules with `RefCell<T>`, your program will instead panic
and exit.

The advantages of checking the borrowing rules at compile time are that errors
will be caught sooner during development, also there's no impact on runtime
performance b/c all analysis is completed beforehand. For those reasons,
checking the borrowing rules at compile time is the best choice in the most
cases, and thus Rust's default.

The advantage of checking the borrowing rules at runtime instead is that
certain memory-safe scenarios that could be rejected by compile-time checks are
then allowed. Static analysis, like the Rust compiler, is inherently
conservative. Some properties of code are impossible to detect by analyzing the
code: the most famous example is the 
[Halting Problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halting_problem).

The `RefCell<T>` type is useful when you’re sure your code follows the
borrowing rules but the compiler is unable to understand and guarantee that.
- can only be used in single-threaded scenarios, like `Rc<T>`.

Recap of the reasons to choose `Box<T>`, `Rc<T>`, or `RefCell<T>`:
- `Rc<T>` enables multiple owners of the same data; `Box<T>` and `RefCell<T>`
  have single owners.
- `Box<T>` allows immutable or mutable borrows checked at compile time; `Rc<T>`
  allows only immutable borrows checked at compile time; `RefCell<T>` allows
  immutable or mutable borrows checked at runtime.
- Because `RefCell<T>` allows mutable borrows checked at runtime, you can
  mutate the value inside the `RefCell<T>` even when the `RefCell<T>` is
  immutable.

Mutating the value inside an immutable value is the ***interior mutability***
pattern.

### Interior Mutability: A Mutable Borrow to an Immutable Value

A consequence of the borrowing rules is that when you have an immutable value,
you can't borrow it mutably. But there are situations where it'd be useful for
a value to mutate itself by way of its own methods, but appear immutable to
"external" code. Code outside the value's methods wouldn't be able to mutate
the value. Using `RefCell<T>` is one way to get the ability to have this
interior mutability, but note `RefCell<T>` doesn't get around the borrowing
rules completely: the borrow checker in the compiler allows this interior
mutability, and the borrowing rules are checked at runtime instead. If you
violate the rules, you'll get a `panic!` instead of a compiler error.

#### A Use Case for Interior Mutability: Mock Objects

A *test double* is a placeholder type that's used in place of another type
during testing to observe certain behavior and make sure it's implemented
properly. Think of it like a "stunt double" in filmmaking, where a person steps
in and substitutes for an actor to do a stunt. Test doubles stand in for other
types when we're running tests. *Mock objects* are specific types of test
doubles that record what happens during a test so you can assert that the
correct actions took place.

Here's the scenario we'll test: we'll create a library that tracks a value
against a maximum value and sends messages based on how close to the maximum
value the current value is.
- could be used to keep track of a user’s quota for the number of API calls
  they’re allowed to make
  
```rust
pub trait Messenger {
    fn send(&self, msg: &str);
}

pub struct LimitTracker<'a, T: Messenger> {
    messenger: &'a T,
    value: usize,
    max: usize,
}

impl<'a, T> LimitTracker<'a, T>
where
    T: Messenger,
{
    pub fn new(messenger: &'a T, max: usize) -> LimitTracker<'a, T> {
        LimitTracker {
            messenger,
            value: 0,
            max,
        }
    }

    pub fn set_value(&mut self, value: usize) {
        self.value = value;

        let percentage_of_max = self.value as f64 / self.max as f64;

        if percentage_of_max >= 1.0 {
            self.messenger.send("Error: You are over your quota!");
        } else if percentage_of_max >= 0.9 {
            self.messenger
                .send("Urgent warning: You've used up over 90% of your quota!");
        } else if percentage_of_max >= 0.75 {
            self.messenger
                .send("Warning: You've used up over 75% of your quota!");
        }
    }
}
```

Now for the test:
```rust
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    struct MockMessenger {
        sent_messages: Vec<String>,
    }

    impl MockMessenger {
        fn new() -> MockMessenger {
            MockMessenger {
                sent_messages: vec![],
            }
        }
    }

    impl Messenger for MockMessenger {
        fn send(&self, message: &str) {
            self.sent_messages.push(String::from(message));  // problem here
        }
    }

    #[test]
    fn it_sends_an_over_75_percent_warning_message() {
        let mock_messenger = MockMessenger::new();
        let mut limit_tracker = LimitTracker::new(&mock_messenger, 100);

        limit_tracker.set_value(80);

        assert_eq!(mock_messenger.sent_messages.len(), 1);
    }
}
```
- this won't compile because `self.sent_messages` is an immutable reference,
  but in the `send` implementation for `MockMessenger` we're trying to mutate
  `self.messages`. Enter `RefCell<T>`!

New test with `RefCell<T>`:
```rust
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;
    use std::cell::RefCell;

    struct MockMessenger {
        sent_messages: RefCell<Vec<String>>,
    }

    impl MockMessenger {
        fn new() -> MockMessenger {
            MockMessenger {
                sent_messages: RefCell::new(vec![]),
            }
        }
    }

    impl Messenger for MockMessenger {
        fn send(&self, message: &str) {  // still &self!
            self.sent_messages.borrow_mut().push(String::from(message));  // notice the .borrow_mut()
        }
    }

    #[test]
    fn it_sends_an_over_75_percent_warning_message() {
        // --snip--

        assert_eq!(mock_messenger.sent_messages.borrow().len(), 1);  // notice the .borrow()
    }
}
```
- now `sent_messages` field is of type `RefCell<Vec<String>>`, and the `new`
  function creates this type.
- in the `send` implementation, we still have immutable reference `&self` (to
  match trait definition).
- the call to `borrow_mut` on `self.sent_messages` allows us to get a *mutable*
  reference to the **value** inside `RefCell<Vec<String>>`. As such, we can
  call `push` on it now.
- the call to `borrow` on the `RefCell<Vec<String>>` gets an immutable
  reference to the vector.

#### Keeping Track of Borrows at Runtime with RefCell\<T\>

When creating immutable and mutable references, we use the `&` and `&mut`
syntax. With `RefCell<T>`, we instead use the `borrow` and `borrow_mut`
methods, which are part of the safe API belonging to `RefCell<T>`. Both types
implement `Deref`, so we can treat them like regular references.
- `borrow` returns smart pointer type `Ref<T>`.
- `borrow_mut` returns smart pointer type `RefMut<T>`.

`RefCell<T>` keeps track of how many `Ref<T>` and `RefMut<T>` smart pointers
are active. Every time we call `borrow`, the `RefCell<T>` increases active
immutable borrow count. Then when a `Ref<T>` value goes out of scope, the
active immutable borrow count goes down by one. `RefCell<T>` lets us have:
- multiple immutable borrows.
- or one mutable borrow at any point in time.

Changing the `send` implementation for `MockMessenger` to the following would
compile w/o errors, but fail the tests:
```rust
    impl Messenger for MockMessenger {
        fn send(&self, message: &str) {
            let mut one_borrow = self.sent_messages.borrow_mut();
            let mut two_borrow = self.sent_messages.borrow_mut();

            one_borrow.push(String::from(message));
            two_borrow.push(String::from(message));
        }
    }
```
```
$ cargo test
   Compiling limit-tracker v0.1.0 (file:///projects/limit-tracker)
    Finished `test` profile [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.91s
     Running unittests src/lib.rs (target/debug/deps/limit_tracker-e599811fa246dbde)

running 1 test
test tests::it_sends_an_over_75_percent_warning_message ... FAILED

failures:

---- tests::it_sends_an_over_75_percent_warning_message stdout ----
thread 'tests::it_sends_an_over_75_percent_warning_message' panicked at src/lib.rs:60:53:
already borrowed: BorrowMutError
note: run with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` environment variable to display a backtrace


failures:
    tests::it_sends_an_over_75_percent_warning_message

test result: FAILED. 0 passed; 1 failed; 0 ignored; 0 measured; 0 filtered out; finished in 0.00s

error: test failed, to rerun pass `--lib`
```
- notice this line: `already borrowed: BorrowMutError`. This is how
  `RefCell<T>` handles borrow rules violations at runtime.
  
### Having Multiple Owners of Mutable Data by Combining Rc<T> and RefCell<T>

A common way to use `RefCell<T>` is in combination with `Rc<T>`. Recall `Rc<T>`
lets you have multiple owners of some data, but it only gives immutable access
to that data. If you have an `Rc<T>` that holds a `RefCell<T>`, you can get a
value that can have multiple owners and that you can mutate!
- (much hack, very woah)

e.g. recall the cons list where we used `Rc<T>` to allow multiple lists to
share ownership of another list. B/c `Rc<T>` holds only immutable values, we
can't change any values in the list once created. But if we add in
`RefCell<T>`, we gain the ability to change the values in the lists. The
following shows we can modify the value stored in all the lists if we add
`RefCell<T>` in the `Cons` definition:
```rust
use std::cell::RefCell;
use std::rc::Rc;

#[derive(Debug)]
enum List {
    Cons(Rc<RefCell<i32>>, Rc<List>),
    Nil,
}

use crate::List::{Cons, Nil};

fn main() {
    let value = Rc::new(RefCell::new(5));

    let a = Rc::new(Cons(Rc::clone(&value), Rc::new(Nil)));

    let b = Cons(Rc::new(RefCell::new(3)), Rc::clone(&a));
    let c = Cons(Rc::new(RefCell::new(4)), Rc::clone(&a));

    *value.borrow_mut() += 10;

    println!("a after = {a:?}");
    println!("b after = {b:?}");
    println!("c after = {c:?}");
}
```
```
a after = Cons(RefCell { value: 15 }, Nil)
b after = Cons(RefCell { value: 3 }, Cons(RefCell { value: 15 }, Nil))
c after = Cons(RefCell { value: 4 }, Cons(RefCell { value: 15 }, Nil))
```
- We create a value that is an instance of `Rc<RefCell<i32>>` and store it in a
  variable named `value` so we can access it directly later.
- We wrap the list `a` in an `Rc<T>` so when we create lists `b` and `c`, they
  can both refer to `a`.
- We call `borrow_mut` on `*value` to be able to add 10 to it.

This technique is pretty neat! By using `RefCell<T>`, we have an outwardly
immutable `List` value. But we can use the methods on `RefCell<T>` that provide
access to its interior mutability. So, we can modify our data when we need to.

`Mutex<T>` is the thread-safe version of `RefCell<T>` and we’ll discuss
`Mutex<T>` in Chapter 16.

### Quiz

1. Which of the following best describes the concept of *interior mutability*
   in Rust?

**Answer:** Allowing data to be mutated through an immutable reference.
- The main idea of interior mutability is taking a value of type `&T` and being
  able to safely mutate data within `T`.

2. Consider an API that tracks the number of calls to a particular method:
```rust
struct Api {
    count: ???
}
impl Api {
    fn some_method(&self) {
        // increment count
        // rest of the method...
    }    
}
```
Say the count is represented as a `usize`. Which of the following (types) would
be the most appropriate wrapper type to use for this situation?

**Answer:** `RefCell<T>`
- Here a `RefCell` is useful to mutate an internal field even though
  `some_method` takes an immutable reference as input. If the internal field is
  just an integer, an even better choice of type would be `Cell<usize>` or
  `AtomicUsize`.
  
3. Consider the following incorrect implementation of a `RefCell` that does not
   check whether the interior value is borrowed:
```rust
use std::cell::UnsafeCell;
struct BadRefCell<T>(UnsafeCell<T>);
impl<T> BadRefCell<T> {
    pub fn borrow_mut(&self) -> &mut T {
        unsafe { &mut *self.0.get() }
    }
}
```
Now say we have a `BadRefCell` like this:
```rust
let v = BadRefCell(UnsafeCell::new(vec![1, 2, 3]));
```
Which of the following snippets would violate memory safety using this API?

**Answer:**
```rust
let v1 = v.borrow_mut();
let n = &v1[0];
v.borrow_mut().push(0);
println!("{n}");
```
- The `BadRefCell` allows us to have two mutable references to the underlying
  data at the same time, which permits a memory safety violation like
  reallocating a vector while holding a reference to its contents.
