## Storing Lists of Values with Vectors
*Vectors* (`Vec<T>`) can store more than one value in a single data structure that puts all the values next to each other in memory.
- vectors can only store values of the same type.

### Creating a New Vector
To create a new empty vector, call the `Vec::new()` function:
```rust
let v: Vec<i32> = Vec::new();
```
- to type annotate the contents of the `Vec`, specify the type between the `<>`

To create a new vector with initial values, use the `vec!` macro:
```rust
let v = vec![1, 1, 1970];
```

### Updating a Vector
To add elements to a vector, use the `push` method:
```rust
let mut v = Vec::new();

v.push(5);
v.push(6);
v.push(7);
v.push(8);
```
- like with any other variable, a vector needs to be mutable to be able to update it

### Reading Elements of Vectors
To reference a value inside a vector, use indexing the `get` method
- the `get` method requires an index as a parameter and returns an `Option<&T>` type. `&T` is a reference to the piece of type `T` data in vector at that index. This means that we need to use `match` or an `unwrap()` method to  retrieve the data inside of the option.
    - if the vector doesn't have index passed into `get`, then it will return `None`.

When a program has a valid reference, the borrow checker enforces the ownership and borrowing rules to ensure this reference and any other references to the contents of the vector remain valid. Recall how you can’t have mutable and immutable references in the same scope. Now consider a program that holds an immutable reference to the first element in a vector and tries to add an element to the end. This program won’t work if we also try to refer to that element later in the function:
```rust
fn main() {
    let mut v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

    let first = &v[0];

    v.push(6);

    println!("The first element is: {first}");
}
```
```
$ cargo run
   Compiling collections v0.1.0 (file:///projects/collections)
error[E0502]: cannot borrow `v` as mutable because it is also borrowed as immutable
 --> src/main.rs:6:5
  |
4 |     let first = &v[0];
  |                  - immutable borrow occurs here
5 |
6 |     v.push(6);
  |     ^^^^^^^^^ mutable borrow occurs here
7 |
8 |     println!("The first element is: {first}");
  |                                      ----- immutable borrow later used here

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0502`.
error: could not compile `collections` due to previous error
```
This might look like it should work since we are accessing different elements of the vector: why should a reference to the first element care about changes at the end of the vector? But it produces an error due to how vectors work: vectors put the values next to each other in memory. Adding a new element onto the end of the vector might require allocating new memory and copying the old elements to the new space (if there isn’t enough room to put all the elements next to each other where the vector is stored). In which case, the reference to the first element would be pointing to deallocated memory.

### Iterating over the Values in a Vector
To access each element in a vector in turn, we would iterate through all of the elements. This can be done using a `for` loop. For example, iterating over a vector to get immutable and mutable references:
```rust
let v = vec![100, 32, 57];
for n_ref in &v {
    // n_ref has type &i32
    let n_plus_one: i32 = *n_ref + 1;
    println!("{n_plus_one}");
} // To read the number that n_ref refers to, use the * dereference operator to get to the value in n_ref before adding 1 to it

let mut v = vec![100, 32, 57];
for n_ref in &mut v {
    // n_ref has type &mut i32
    *n_ref += 50;
} // To change the value that the mutable reference refers to, use the * dereference operator to get to the value in n_ref before we using the += operator.
```

### Quiz 1
1. What call to this find_until function will cause a runtime panic?
```rust
fn find_until(v: &Vec<i32>, n: i32, til: usize) -> Option<usize> {
  for i in 0 .. til {
    if v[i] == n {
      return Some(i);
    }
  }
  return None;
}
```
#### Answer: 
`find_until(&vec![1, 2, 3], 4, 4)` because there is no 4 in the vector, so the loop would keep going until it reaches the value of `til`, which is 4. But the vector doesn't have an index 4, thus causing a runtime error.

2. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of the program if it were executed.
```rust
fn main() {
  let mut v = Vec::new();
  let s = String::from("Hello ");
  v.push(s);
  v[0].push_str("world");
  println!("original: {}", s);
  println!("new: {}", v[0]);
}
```
#### Answer:
`Vec::push` moves its argument, so `s` gets freed and isn't usable after calling `v.push(s)`. So calling `println!("original: {}", s)` isn't ownership-safe because `s` has been freed.

3. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of the program if it were executed.
```rust
fn main() {
  let v = vec![String::from("Hello ")];
  let mut s = v[0];
  s.push_str("world");
  println!("{s}");
}
```
#### Answer:
`String` doesn't implement the `Copy` trait, and non-copyable types can't be moved out of a vector by indexing.
- Only methods such as `Vec::remove` permit moving out of a vector

### Safely Using Iterators
Iterators contain a pointer to data within the vector being iterated upon. A for-loop is really just syntactic sugar for method calls of [`Vec::iter`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/vec/struct.Vec.html#method.iter) and [`Iterator::next`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html#tymethod.next)
- `iter` is a pointer that moves through each element of the vector. 
- `next` method advances the iterator and returns an optional reference to the previous element, either `Some` or `None` (once end of vector reached).

Consider the following; why doesn't it compile?:
```rust
fn dup_in_place(v: &mut Vec<i32>) {
    for n_ref in v.iter() {
        v.push(*n_ref);
    }
}
```
when `v.iter()` is operating, it removes W permission from `v`. If it didn't then `v.iter()` would be invalidated since it is a pointer to a piece of data `v` and the `v` would be reallocated as a result of modifying it with `v.push(*n_ref)`. So to prevent this behavior, Rust doesn't let the program compile.

Instead of using a pointer to iterate over a vector we can use a range. For example, the range `0 .. v.len()` is an iterator over all indices of a vector `v`:
```rust
fn main() {
    use std::ops::Range; 
    let mut v: Vec<i32>        = vec![1, 2];
    let mut iter: Range<usize> = 0 .. v.len();          // iter equals 0..2 after this line executes
    let i1: usize              = iter.next().unwrap();  // iter equals 1..2 but is assigned to i1 after this executes
    let n1: &i32               = &v[i1];                // indexing an immutable vector reference using a range
}
```

### Using an Enum to Store Multiple Types
Recall that vectors can only store values of the same type. But also recall that variants of an enum are defined under the same enum type. So we can make an enum type what the vector expects and then pass different variants into the vector, and thus work around this inconvenience.

For example, say we want to get values from a row in a spreadsheet where some of the columns in the row contain integers, some floats numbers, and some strings. We can define an enum whose variants will hold the different value types, yet each enum variant will be considered the same type. Then we can create a vector to hold that enum and so, ultimately, holds different types:
```rust
fn main() {
    enum SpreadsheetCell {
        Int(i32),
        Float(f64),
        Text(String),
    }

    let row = vec![
        SpreadsheetCell::Int(3),
        SpreadsheetCell::Text(String::from("blue")),
        SpreadsheetCell::Float(10.12),
    ];
}
```

### Dropping a Vector Drops Its Elements
Like any other struct, a vector is freed when it goes out of scope:
```rust
fn main() {
    {
        let v = vec![1, 2, 3, 4];
        // do stuff with v
    } // <- v goes out of scope and is freed here
}
```
When the vector gets dropped, all its contents are also dropped. The borrow checker ensures that any references to contents of a vector are only used while the vector itself is valid.

### Quiz 2
1. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of the program if it were executed.
```rust

fn main() {
  let mut v = vec![1, 2, 3];
  for i in &mut v {
    v.push(*i);
  }
  println!("{} {} {}", v[3], v[4], v[5]);
}
```
#### Answer:
This doesn't compile because `v.push(*i)` modifies `v` and everytime `v` gets modified, it gets reallocated. This causes the mutable reference (pointer) `&mut v` get invalidated, resulting in the compiler rejecting the program.

2. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of the program if it were executed.
```rust
fn main() {
  let mut v: Vec<i32> = vec![1, 2, 3];
  let mut v2: Vec<&mut i32> = Vec::new();
  for i in &mut v {
    v2.push(i);
  }
  *v2[0] = 5;
  let a = *v2[0];
  let b = v[0];
  println!("{a} {b}");
}
```
#### Answer:
This program does compile and prints `5 5`. `i` has the type `&mut i32` (pointer to a number inside `v`). Pushing `i` into `v2` it's elements are pointers to the corresponding element in `v`. Which meants that mutating `v2[0]` actually mutates `v[0]`.