## Storing UTF-8 Encoded Text with Strings
New Rustaceans commonly get stuck on strings for a combination of three reasons: Rust’s propensity for exposing possible errors, strings being a more complicated data structure than many programmers give them credit for, and UTF-8.

Strings are implemented as a collection of bytes

### What Is a String?
Rust has only one string type in the core language, the string slice `str` (usually seen in its borrowed form `&str`). String slices are references to some UTF-8 encoded string data stored elsewhere. String literals, for example, are stored in the program’s binary and are therefore string slices.

The `String` type, provided by Rust’s standard library (not in the core language), is a growable, mutable, owned, UTF-8 encoded string type.

### Creating a New String
Many of the same operations available for `Vec<T>` are available with `String` as well, because `String` is actually implemented as a wrapper around a vector of bytes with some extra guarantees, restrictions, and capabilities. Often, we’ll have some initial data that we want to start a string with. We use the `to_string` method, which is available on any type that implements the Display trait, as string literals do:
```rust
let data = "initial contents";

let s = data.to_string();

// the method also works on a literal directly:
let s = "initial contents".to_string();
```
- `"word".to_string()` is equal to `String::from("word")`

### Updating a String
4 ways to update a string:
1. can update a string using `push_str(&mut self, &str)` which must be called on a `String` and takes in a string slice (`&str`)

2. we can also use `push()` which takes in a `char` and appends it to a string via a mutable reference to self (`&mut self`)

3. you can also use the `+` operator. for example:
    ```rust
    let s1 = String::from("Hello, ");
    let s2 = String::from("world!");
    let s3 = s1 + &s2; // note s1 has been moved here and can no longer be used
    ```
    where `+` indicates calls the `add(self, s: &str) -> String` (in the case of strings) method. in the exmaple above, `s1` is self and `&s2` is the `s` argument. So if calling `a + b` where `a` == `self` and `b` == `&str`. 

4. using the `format!` macro, which works like `println!`, but instead of printing the output to the screen, it returns a `String` with the contents. can take in `&str` or `String` types.

---

### Quiz 1
1. What is the difference between using a + b and a.push_str(b) to concatenate two strings?
#### Answer:
`+` consumes ownership of `a` while `push_str` doesn't. `+` takes `self` which would be the first item in the addition, thus consuming ownership of `self`. `push_str` takes `&mut self` which is a mutable reference to `self`

2. What is the maximum number of times a heap allocation could occur in this program? Write your answer in digits.
```rust
let s1 = String::from("tic");
let s2 = String::from("tac");
let s3 = String::from("toe");
let s = s1 + "-" + &s2 + "-" + &s3;
```
#### Answer:
7 heap-allocations at most. 3 come from the `String::from` statements. 4 come from each use of `+`

---

### Indexing into Strings

#### Internal Representation
Trying to access parts of a `String` using indexing syntax in Rust will result in an error. This is because `String` in Rust doesn't support indexing. But why not? To answer that question, we need to discuss how Rust stores strings in memory. Different unicode scalar values can require a different number of bytes to be encoded into UTF-8 (particularly for different languages alphabets). This means an index into the string’s bytes will not always correlate to a valid Unicode scalar value. The answer, then, is that to avoid returning an unexpected value and causing bugs that might not be discovered immediately, Rust doesn’t compile this code at all and prevents misunderstandings early in the development process.

#### Bytes and Scalar Values and Grapheme Clusters! Oh My!
There are three relevant ways to look at UTF-8 encoded strings from Rust’s perspective: as bytes, scalar values, and grapheme clusters
- grapheme clusters are the closest thing to what we would call letters

Rust provides different ways of interpreting the raw string data that computers store so that each program can choose the interpretation it needs, no matter what human language the data is in.

A final reason Rust doesn’t allow us to index into a `String` to get a character is that indexing operations are expected to always take constant time (O(1)). But it isn’t possible to guarantee that performance with a `String`, because Rust would have to walk through the contents from the beginning to the index to determine how many valid characters there were.

### Slicing Strings
Indexing into a string is often a bad idea because it’s not clear what the return type of the string-indexing operation should be: a byte value, a character, a grapheme cluster, or a string slice. So if we need to use indices to create string slices, use a range inside `[]`:
```rust
let hello = "Здравствуйте";
let s = &hello[0..4];        // s will equal "Зд";
```
- `s` will contain the first 4 bytes of data from the `hello` string. Each character in `hello` takes 2 bytes of data, so `s` will actually be the first two characters of `hello`, or `Зд`.
- If we tried to do `&hello[0..1]` instead, we would get the following error:
    ```
    $ cargo run
       Compiling collections v0.1.0 (file:///projects/collections)
        Finished dev [unoptimized + debuginfo] target(s) in 0.43s
         Running `target/debug/collections`
    thread 'main' panicked at 'byte index 1 is not a char boundary; it is inside 'З' (bytes 0..2) of `Здравствуйте`', src/main.rs:4:14
    note: run with `RUST_BACKTRACE=1` environment variable to display a backtrace
    ```

### Methods for Iterating Over Strings
The best way to operate on pieces of strings is to be explicit about whether you want characters or bytes. 

For individual Unicode scalar values, use the chars method:
```rust
for c in "Зд".chars() {
    println!("{c}");
}
```
```
Output:
З
д
```

For bytes, the `bytes` method returns each raw byte:
```rust
for b in "Зд".bytes() {
    println!("{b}");
}
```
```
Output:
208
151
208
180
```

---

### Quiz 2
1. Which statement is the best explanation for why Rust does not allow string indexing?
#### Answer:
Indexing strings is ambiguous because strings represent several granularities of sequenced data. A UTF-8 string can be interpreted as a sequence of bytes, characters, or grapheme clusters. None of these is necessarily the "default" way of interpreting a string, so a default indexing operation does not make sense.

2. Which statement best describes the difference between the types of a string slice `&str` and a byte slice `&[u8]`?
#### Answer:
`&str` points to bytes that can always be interpreted as UTF-8, whereas `&[u8]` can be any byte sequence. An `&str` is a promise that the byte sequence it points to will always be valid UTF-8. Therefore a programmer who wants to print out an `&str` never needs to check if it is valid, or worry about accidentally interpreting an invalid string.

---