## Storing Keys with Associated Values in Hash Maps
The type `HashMap<K, V>` stores a mapping of keys of type `K` to values of type `V` using a hashing function, which determines how it places these keys and values into memory. 
- Many programming languages support this kind of data structure, but they often use a different name, such as hash, map, object, hash table, dictionary, or associative array, to name a few.
- Hash maps are useful when you want to look up data by using a key that can be of any type

### Creating a New Hash Map
Like vectors, hash maps store their data on the heap.

One way to create an empty hash map is using `new` and adding elements with `insert`:
```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);
```
- here the `HashMap` has keys of type `String` and values of type `i32`. Like vectors, hash maps are homogeneous: all of the keys must have the same type as each other, and all of the values must have the same type.

### Accessing Values in a Hash Map
We can get a value out of the hash map by passing one of it's keys into the `get` method:
```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);

let team_name = String::from("Blue");
let score = scores.get(&team_name).copied().unwrap_or(0);
```
- Here, `score` will have the value that’s associated with the `Blue` team, and the result will be 10. The `get` method returns an `Option<&V>;` if there’s no value for that key in the hash map, get will return `None`. This program handles the `Option` by calling `copied` to get an `Option<i32>` rather than an `Option<&i32>`, then `unwrap_or` to set score to zero if scores doesn't have an entry for the key.

We can iterate over each key/value pair in a hash map in a similar manner as we do with vectors, using a `for` loop:
```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let mut scores = HashMap::new();

scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
scores.insert(String::from("Yellow"), 50);

for (key, value) in &scores {
    println!("{key}: {value}");
}
```

### Hash Maps and Ownership
For types that implement the `Copy` trait, the values are copied into the hash map. For owned values like `String`, the values will be moved and the hash map will be the owner of those values:
```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;

let field_name = String::from("Favorite color");
let field_value = String::from("Blue");

let mut map = HashMap::new();
map.insert(field_name, field_value);
// the following code wouldn't work because ownership of field_name and field_value
// was moved into map.
// println!("{}: {}", field_name, field_value);
```
- If we instead inserted references to values into the hash map, the values won’t be moved into the hash map; instead the value in the hash map would be a pointer. The values that the references point to must be valid for at least as long as the hash map is valid. Otherwise, the pointers would be directed at deallocated memory.

### Updating a Hash Map
When you want to change the data in a hash map, you have to decide how to handle the case when a key already has a value assigned. You could replace the old value with the new value, disregarding the old value. You could keep the old value and ignore the new value, only adding the new value if the key doesn’t already have a value. Or you could combine the old value and the new value.

#### Overwriting a Value
If we insert a key and a value into a hash map and then insert that same key with a different value, the value associated with that key will be replaced:
```rust
fn main() {
    use std::collections::HashMap;

    let mut scores = HashMap::new();

    scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);
    scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 25);

    println!("{:?}", scores);  // prints {"Blue": 25}, 25 overwrites 10
}
```

#### Adding a Key and Value Only If a Key Isn’t Present
If the key does exist in the hash map, the existing value should remain the way it is. If the key doesn’t exist, insert it and a value for it

Hash maps have a special API for this called `entry` that takes the key you want to check as a parameter. The return value of the entry method is an enum called `Entry` that represents a value that might or might not exist. Using the `entry` API:
```rust
fn main() {
    use std::collections::HashMap;

    let mut scores = HashMap::new();
    scores.insert(String::from("Blue"), 10);

    scores.entry(String::from("Yellow")).or_insert(50);
    scores.entry(String::from("Blue")).or_insert(50);

    println!("{:?}", scores);   // output is {"Yellow": 50, "Blue": 10}
}
```
- `or_insert` method on `Entry` returns a mutable reference to the value for the corresponding `Entry` key if that key exists, otherwise it inserts the parameter as the new value for this key and returns a mutable reference to the new value.
- The first call to `entry` will insert the key for the Yellow team with the value 50 because the Yellow team doesn’t have a value already. The second call to `entry` will not change the hash map because the Blue team already has the value 10.

#### Updating a Value Based on the Old Value
A common use case for hash maps is to look up a key’s value and then update it based on the old value:
```rust
fn main() {
    use std::collections::HashMap;

    let text = "hello world wonderful world";

    let mut map = HashMap::new();

    for word in text.split_whitespace() {
        let count = map.entry(word).or_insert(0);
        *count += 1;
    }

    println!("{:?}", map);  // prints {"wonderful": 1, "world": 2, "hello": 1}
}
```
- You might see the same key/value pairs printed in a different order: recall that iterating over a hash map happens in an arbitrary order.
- `split_whitespace` returns an iterator over sub-slices of the value in text, separated by whitespace. 
- `or_insert` returns a mutable reference (`&mut V`) to the value for the specified key.
- Here we store the mutable reference returned from `or_insert` in the `count` variable. In order to assign to `count`, we need to dereference it. The mutable reference goes out of scope at the end of the for loop, so all of these changes are safe and allowed by the borrowing rules.

### Hashing Functions
By default, `HashMap` uses a hashing function called ***SipHash*** that can provide resistance to Denial of Service (DoS) attacks involving hash tables.

***SipHash*** isn't the fastest hashing algorithm available, but the trade-off for better security that comes with the drop in performance is worth it. If you profile your code and find that the default hash function is too slow for your purposes, you can switch to another function by specifying a different hasher. 

A ***hasher*** is a type that implements the `BuildHasher` trait. You don’t have to implement your own hasher from scratch; [crates.io](https://crates.io/) has libraries shared by other Rust users that provide hashers implementing many common hashing algorithms.

---

### Quiz 1
1. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of the program if it were executed.
```rust
use std::collections::HashMap;
fn main() {
    let mut h = HashMap::new();
    h.insert("k1", 0);
    let v1 = &h["k1"];
    h.insert("k2", 1);
    let v2 = &h["k2"];
    println!("{} {}", v1, v2);
}
```
#### Answer:
This program does not compile. `h` cannot be mutated (`h.insert("k2", 1)`) while an immutable reference (`v1`) to it is live. Recall how vectors work. An immutable reference to one element of a vector prevents any other element from being mutated while the immutable reference is being used.

2. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of the program if it were executed.
```rust

use std::collections::HashMap;
fn main() {
    let mut h: HashMap<char, Vec<usize>> = HashMap::new();
    for (i, c) in "hello!".chars().enumerate() {    // (usize, char)
    h.entry(c).or_insert(Vec::new()).push(i);       // key: char, value: usize
    }
    let mut sum = 0;
    for i in h.get(&'l').unwrap() {                 // i is the index at which 'l' occurs
    sum += *i;                                      // adds the value of i to sum
    }
    println!("{}", sum);
}
```
#### Answer:
This program does compile and the output is 5. The program stores a vector of indexes for each occurrence of a given letter into a hashmap. Then it sums all the indexes for the letter 'l', which occurs at indexes 2 and 3 in the string "hello!". `i` is the index and `c` is the value at the index as a result of `enumerate()`.

---

### Summary/Challenge:
Vectors, strings, and hash maps will provide a large amount of functionality necessary in programs when you need to store, access, and modify data. Here are some exercises you should now be equipped to solve:
- Given a list of integers, use a vector and return the median (when sorted, the value in the middle position) and mode (the value that occurs most often; a hash map will be helpful here) of the list.
- Convert strings to pig latin. The first consonant of each word is moved to the end of the word and “ay” is added, so “first” becomes “irst-fay.” Words that start with a vowel have “hay” added to the end instead (“apple” becomes “apple-hay”). Keep in mind the details about UTF-8 encoding!
- Using a hash map and vectors, create a text interface to allow a user to add employee names to a department in a company. For example, “Add Sally to Engineering” or “Add Amir to Sales.” Then let the user retrieve a list of all people in a department or all people in the company by department, sorted alphabetically.