# Unsafe Rust

Unsafe Rust exists because, by nature, static analysis is conservative. When the compiler tries to
determine whether or not code upholds the guarantees, it's better for it to reject some valid
programs than to accept some invalid programs.

Another reason Rust has an unsafe alter ego is that the underlying computer hardware is inherently
unsafe. If Rust didn't let you do unsafe operations, you couldn't do certain tasks. Rust needs to
allow you to do low-level systems programming, such as directly interacting with the operating
system or even writing your own operating system. Working with low-level systems programming is one
of the goals of the language.

## Unsafe Superpowers

To switch to unsafe Rust, use the `unsafe` keyword and then start a new block that holds the unsafe
code. You can take five actions in unsafe Rust that you can’t in safe Rust, which we call unsafe
superpowers. Those superpowers include the ability to:

- Dereference a raw pointer
- Call an unsafe function or method
- Access or modify a mutable static variable
- Implement an unsafe trait
- Access fields of a union

`unsafe` doesn't turn off the borrow checker or disable any other of Rust's safety checks: if you
use a reference in unsafe code, it'll still be checked. The `unsafe` keyword only gives you access
to these five features that are then not checked by the compiler for memory safety. You'll still get
some degree of safety inside of an unsafe block.

## Dereferencing a Raw Pointer

Unsafe Rust has two new types called raw pointers that are similar to references. As with
references, raw pointers can be immutable (`*const T`) or mutable (`*mut T`).
- The `*` isn't the dereference operator, it's part of the type name.
- In the context of raw pointers, *immutable* means that the pointer can't be directly assigned to
  after being dereferenced.

Different from references and smart pointers, raw pointers:

- Are allowed to ignore the borrowing rules by having both immutable and mutable pointers or
  multiple mutable pointers to the same location
- Aren't guaranteed to point to valid memory
- Are allowed to be null
- Don't implement any automatic cleanup

By opting out of these guarantees, you give up safety in exchange for greater performance, the
ability to interact with another language, or even the ability to interact with hardware. Rust's
guarantees don't apply here.

How to create an immutable and a mutable raw pointer from references:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut num = 5;

    let r1 = &num as *const i32;
    let r2 = &mut num as *mut i32;
}
```

- We can create raw pointers in safe code; we just can't dereference raw pointers outside an unsafe
  block
- created the raw pointers by using `as` to cast the immutable and mutable references into their
  corresponding raw pointer types.
  - B/c we created them directly from references guaranteed to be valid, we know these particular
    raw pointers are valid; but the same assumption can't be made about just any raw pointer.

The following is a raw pointer (of questionable validity) at a random memory address. Trying to use
arbitrary memory is undefined: there might be data at that address, there might not be data at all,
the compiler might optimize the code so there's no memory access, or the program might error with a
*seg fault* (segmentation fault). Usually, there is no good reason to write code like this, but it's
possible:

```rust
fn main() {
    let address = 0x012345usize;
    let r = address as *const i32;
}
```

- creating the pointer does no harm; it's only when attempting to access the data it points to that
  there could be a problem.

Why would you ever use raw pointers? One major use case is when interfacing with C code, or when
building up safe abstractions that the borrow checker doesn’t understand.

## Calling an Unsafe Method or Function

Unsafe functions and methods have an extra `unsafe` before `fn` during their definition. `unsafe`
indicates the function has requirements that we'll uphold b/c Rust can't guarantee them.
- By calling an unsafe function within an unsafe block, we’re saying that we’ve read this function’s
  documentation and take responsibility for upholding the function’s contracts.

Here's an unsafe function named dangerous that doesn't do anything:

```rust
fn main() {
    unsafe fn dangerous() {}

    unsafe {
        dangerous();
    }
}
```

If we don't call `dangerous` from w/in an `unsafe` block, we'll get:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling unsafe-example v0.1.0 (file:///projects/unsafe-example)
error[E0133]: call to unsafe function `dangerous` is unsafe and requires unsafe function or block
 --> src/main.rs:4:5
  |
4 |     dangerous();
  |     ^^^^^^^^^^^ call to unsafe function
  |
  = note: consult the function's documentation for information on how to avoid undefined behavior

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0133`.
error: could not compile `unsafe-example` (bin "unsafe-example") due to 1 previous error
```

### Creating a Safe Abstraction over Unsafe Code

Just b/c a function contains unsafe code doesn't mean we need to mark the entire function as unsafe;
wrapping unsafe code in a safe function is a common abstraction. Let's study the `split_at_mut`
function from the standard library, which can't be implemented using only safe Rust. We'll recreate
`split_at_mut` as a function rather than a method.

```rust
fn split_at_mut(values: &mut [i32], mid: usize) -> (&mut [i32], &mut [i32]) {
    let len = values.len();

    assert!(mid <= len);

    (&mut values[..mid], &mut values[mid..])
}
```

When compiled, we get this error:

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling unsafe-example v0.1.0 (file:///projects/unsafe-example)
error[E0499]: cannot borrow `*values` as mutable more than once at a time
 --> src/main.rs:6:31
  |
1 | fn split_at_mut(values: &mut [i32], mid: usize) -> (&mut [i32], &mut [i32]) {
  |                         - let's call the lifetime of this reference `'1`
...
6 |     (&mut values[..mid], &mut values[mid..])
  |     --------------------------^^^^^^--------
  |     |     |                   |
  |     |     |                   second mutable borrow occurs here
  |     |     first mutable borrow occurs here
  |     returning this value requires that `*values` is borrowed for `'1`
  |
  = help: use `.split_at_mut(position)` to obtain two mutable non-overlapping sub-slices

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0499`.
error: could not compile `unsafe-example` (bin "unsafe-example") due to 1 previous error
```

- the borrow checker doesn't get that we're borrowing different parts of the slice, only that we're
  trying to borrow the same slice twice.

To make our implementation of `split_at_mut` work, we use an `unsafe` block, a raw pointer, and some
calls to unsafe functions:

```rust
use std::slice;

fn split_at_mut(values: &mut [i32], mid: usize) -> (&mut [i32], &mut [i32]) {
    let len = values.len();
    let ptr = values.as_mut_ptr();
    
    assert!(mid <= len);

    unsafe {
        (
            slice::from_raw_parts_mut(ptr, mid),
            slice::from_raw_parts_mut(ptr.add(mid), len - mid)
        )
    }
}
```

- `as_mut_ptr` accesses the raw pointer of a slice. It returns a raw pointer with the type `*mut
  i32`, which we've stored in the variable ptr.
- the unsafe code is `slice::from_raw_parts_mut`, which takes a raw pointer and a length, and
  creates a slice.
  - We use it to create a slice that starts from `ptr` and is `mid` items long. Then we call the
    `add` method on `ptr` with `mid` as an argument (gets raw pointer starting at `mid`), and then
    create a slice using that pointer and the remaining number of items after `mid` as the length.
- `slice::from_raw_parts_mut` is unsafe b/c it takes a raw pointer; the compiler must trust that
  this pointer is valid. The `add` method on raw pointers is also unsafe b/c it must trust that the
  offset location is also a valid pointer. Therefore, we had to put an `unsafe` block around our
  calls to `slice::from_raw_parts_mut` and `add` so they could be called.
- looking at the code and b/c of the assertion that `mid` must be less than or equal to `len`, we
  can tell that the raw pointers used within the `unsafe` block are valid pointers to data within
  the slice.

Note that we don't mark the resulting `split_at_mut` function as `unsafe`, and that we can call this
function from safe Rust. We've created a safe abstraction to the unsafe code with an implementation
of the function that uses `unsafe` code in a safe way (it creates only valid pointers from the data
the function has access to).

In contrast, the use of `slice::from_raw_parts_mut` the following program would likely crash when
the slice is used. This code takes an arbitrary memory location and creates a slice 10,000 items
long.

```rust
use std::slice;

fn main() {
    let address = 0x01234usize;
    let r = address as *mut i32;

    let values: &[i32] = unsafe { slice::from_raw_parts_mut(r, 10000) };
}
```

- We don't own the memory at this arbitrary location, and there is no guarantee that the slice this
  code creates contains valid `i32` values. Attempting to use values as though it's a valid slice
  results in undefined behavior.

### Using `extern` Functions to Call External Code

Sometimes, your Rust code might need to interact with code written in another language. For this,
Rust has the keyword `extern` that facilitates the creation and use of a *Foreign Function Interface
(FFI)*. An FFI is a way for a programming language to define functions and enable a different
(foreign) programming language to call those functions.

The following demonstrates how to set up an integration with the `abs` function from the C standard
library. Functions declared within `extern` blocks are always unsafe to Rust code. The reason is
that other languages don't enforce Rust's rules and guarantees, and Rust can't check them, so
responsibility falls on the programmer to ensure safety.

```rust
extern "C" {
    fn abs(input: i32) -> i32;
}

fn main() {
    unsafe {
        println!("Absolute value of -3 according to C: {}", abs(-3));
    }
}
```

- The "C" part defines which *application binary interface (ABI)* the external function uses. The
  "C" ABI is the most common and follows the C programming language’s ABI.
  - the ***ABI*** defines how to call the function at the assembly level.

> ### Calling Rust Functions from Other Languages
> 
> We can also use extern to create an interface that allows other languages to call Rust functions.
> Instead of creating a whole `extern` block, we add the `extern` keyword and specify the ABI to use
> just before the `fn` keyword for the relevant function. We also need to add a `#[no_mangle]`
> annotation to tell the Rust compiler not to mangle the name of this function.
> - *Mangling* is when a compiler changes the name given to a function to a different name that
>   contains more information for parts of the compilation process to consume (less human readable).
>   Every programming language compiler mangles a bit names differently, so for a Rust function to be
>   nameable by other languages, we must disable the Rust compiler's name mangling.
> 
> In the following example, we make the `call_from_c` function accessible from C code, after it's
> compiled to a shared library and linked from C:
> 
> ```rust
> #[no_mangle]
> pub extern "C" fn call_from_c() {
>     println!("Just called a Rust function from C!");
> }
> ```
> 
> This usage of `extern` does not require `unsafe`.

## Accessing or Modifying a Mutable Static Variable

Rust supports *global variables* but they can be problematic with the ownership rules. If two
threads are accessing the same mutable global variable, it could cause a data race. In Rust, global
variables are called *static* variables. The following is an example declaration and use of a
global/static variable.

```rust
static HELLO_WORLD: &str = "Hello, world!";

fn main() {
    println!("name is: {HELLO_WORLD}");
}
```

Static variables are similar to constants, and they can only store references with the `'static`
lifetime, which means the Rust compiler can figure out the lifetime and we aren't required to
annotate it explicitly. Accessing an immutable static variable is safe.

Differences between immutable static variables and constants:
- Values in a static variable have fixed memory address; using the value will always yield the same
  data. Whereas constants are allowed to duplicate their data whenever used.
- Static variables can be mutable, but mutating a static variable is unsafe.

The following shows how to declare, access, and modify a mutable static variable named `COUNTER`.

```rust
static mut COUNTER: u32 = 0;

fn add_to_count(inc: u32) {
    unsafe {
        COUNTER += inc;
    }
}

fn main() {
    add_to_count(3);

    unsafe {
        println!("COUNTER: {COUNTER}");
    }
}
```

## Implementing an Unsafe Trait

`unsafe` can be used when implementing a trait. A trait is unsafe when at least one of its methods
has some invariant that the compiler can't verify.

```rust
unsafe trait Foo {
    // methods go here
}

unsafe impl Foo for i32 {
    // method implementations go here
}

fn main() {}
```

- using `unsafe impl` means we're responsible for upholding anything the compiler can't verify.

As another example, recall `Sync` and `Send` marker traits: the compiler implements these traits
automatically if types are entirely composed of `Send` and `Sync` types (duh right). Say a type we
implement isn't `Send` or `Sync` (e.g. raw pointers) but we want to mark it as so, we need to use
`unsafe`; Rust can't check that the type guarantees it can be sent safely across and accessed from
multiple threads.

## Accessing Fields of a Union

A `union` is similar to a `struct`, but only one field is used per instance at one time. Unions are
mainly used to interface with unions in C code. Accessing union fields is unsafe because Rust can't
guarantee the type of the data currently being stored in the union instance.
- To learn more about unions, check
  [The Rust Reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/unions.html).

## Quiz

> 1. Which of the following are "superpowers" that Rust enables inside an `unsafe` block?
> 
>    ***Answer***: Calling a function marked as `unsafe`. Dereferencing a raw pointer.
> 
>    **Context**: `unsafe` blocks enable you to dereference raw pointers and call `unsafe`
>    functions. However, `unsafe` doesn't disable the borrow checker (operations on safe references
>    are still checked). A reference can be converted to a raw pointer in normal safe code.
> 
> ---
> 
> 2. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output
>    of the program if it were executed.
> 
>    ```rust
>    fn main() {
>        let mut v = Vec::with_capacity(4);
>        for i in 0 .. 3 { 
>            v.push(i); 
>        }
>        let n = &v[0] as *const i32;
>        v.push(4);
>        println!("{}", unsafe { *n });
>    }
>    ```
> 
>    ***Answer***: Does compile, prints `0`.
>    
>    **Context**: This program is dangerous! It compiles correctly and executes without issue
>    because `Vec` has enough capacity such that `v.push(4)` doesn't resize it. However, if the
>    capacity were `3`, then `n` would point to deallocated memory.
> 
> ---
> 
> 3. Which of the following are situations where using unsafe code (or a safe wrapper around unsafe
>    code) is an idiomatic method for working around the borrow checker?
> 
>    ***Answer***:
>    - Allowing values to be uninitialized when they are not being read
>    - Getting two mutable references to disjoint indices in an array
>    - Having a reference to one field of a struct sit in another field of the same struct
>      
>    **Context**: Two mutable references to disjoint indices is reasonable because the borrow
>    checker doesn't understand when indices are disjoint (like `slice::split_at_mut`).
>    
>    Allowing values to be uninitialized is reasonable because the borrow checker adopts a
>    conservative policy that values must be always initialized, but it's sometimes useful to work
>    with uninitialized values. See
>    [`MaybeUninit`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/mem/union.MaybeUninit.html) and the
>    [`take_mut`](https://docs.rs/take_mut/0.2.2/take_mut/index.html) crate.
>    
>    Having a struct hold a reference to itself is reasonable because the borrow checker cannot
>    reason about the lifetime of self-references. See the
>    [`std::pin`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/std/pin/index.html) module.
>    
>    However, returning a pointer to a stack-allocated variable is never valid to do with unsafe
>    code. The only appropriate workaround is to use garbage collection (e.g. returning an `Rc<T>`
>    instead of `&T`).
