# Advanced Traits

## Specifying Placeholder Types in Trait Definitions with Associated Types

***Associated types*** connect a type placeholder with a trait such that its method definitions can
use these placeholder types in their signatures. The implementor of a trait will specify the
concrete type to be used instead of the placeholder type for the particular implementation. That
way, we can define a trait that uses some types without needing to know exactly what those types are
until the trait is implemented.

For example, think the `Iterator` trait:

```rust
pub trait Iterator {
    type Item;

    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<Self::Item>;
}
```

- The associated type is named `Item` and stands in for the type of the values the type implementing
  the `Iterator` trait is iterating over.
- Implementors of the `Iterator` trait will specify the concrete type for `Item`, and the next
  method will return an `Option` containing a value of that concrete type.

Associated types seem similar to generics in that they allow us to define a function without
specifying what types it handles. Though, we can also specify a type on associated types:

```rust
struct Counter {
    count: u32,
}

impl Iterator for Counter {
    type Item = u32;  // Item must be of type u32

    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<Self::Item> {
        if self.count < 5 {
            self.count += 1;
            Some(self.count)
        } else {
            None
        }
    }
}
```

Why not just define `Iterator` with generics? The reason is that when using generics, we must
annotate the types in each implementation; b/c we can implement `Iterator<String> for Counter` (or
any other type), we could have multiple implementations of `Iterator` for `Counter`.

With associated types, we don't need to annotate types because we can't implement a trait on a type
multiple times. In the previous code with the definition using associated types, we can only choose
what the type of `Item` will be once since there can only be one `impl Iterator for Counter`. We
don't have to specify that we want an iterator of `u32` values everywhere that we call next on
`Counter`.

Associated types also become part of the trait's contract: implementors of the trait must provide a
type to stand in for the associated type placeholder. Associated types often have a name that
describes how the type will be used, and documenting the associated type in the API documentation is
good practice.

## Default Generic Type Parameters and Operator Overloading

When using generic type parameters, default concrete type for the generic type can be specified;
eliminating the need for implementors of the trait to specify a concrete type if the default type
works. The `<PlaceholderType=ConcreteType>` syntax accomplishes this.

An example of where this technique is useful is with *operator overloading*, where you customize the
behavior of an operator (e.g. `+`) in some situations.

Rust doesn't allow creating our own operators or overloading arbitrary operators. But we can
overload the operations and corresponding traits listed in `std::ops` by implementing the traits
associated with the operator. For example, this overloads the `+` operator to add two `Point`
instances together by implementing the `Add` trait on a `Point` struct:

```rust
use std::ops::Add;

#[derive(Debug, Copy, Clone, PartialEq)]
struct Point {
    x: i32,
    y: i32,
}

impl Add for Point {
    type Output = Point;

    fn add(self, other: Point) -> Point {
        Point {
            x: self.x + other.x,
            y: self.y + other.y,
        }
    }
}

fn main() {
    assert_eq!(
        Point { x: 1, y: 0 } + Point { x: 2, y: 3 },
        Point { x: 3, y: 3 }
    );
}
```

- This allows adding the `x` and `y` fields of the two `Point` instances together to yield a single,
  summed up `Point`.
- The default generic type in this code is within the `Add` trait. Here is its definition:
  ```rust
  trait Add<Rhs=Self> {
      type Output;
  
      fn add(self, rhs: Rhs) -> Self::Output;
  }
  ```
  - `Rhs` means right-hand side.
  - `Rhs=Self` is called *default type parameter(s)*.

Now for an example not using the default type. There's two structs, `Millimeters` and `Meters`,
holding values in different units. The wrapping of an existing type in another struct is known as
the *newtype pattern*. We want to add values in millimeters to values in meters and have the
implementation of `Add` do the conversion correctly. We implement `Add` for `Millimeters` with
`Meters` as the `Rhs`:

```rust
use std::ops::Add;

struct Millimeters(u32);
struct Meters(u32);

impl Add<Meters> for Millimeters {
    type Output = Millimeters;

    fn add(self, other: Meters) -> Millimeters {
        Millimeters(self.0 + (other.0 * 1000))
    }
}
```

Default type parameters are used in two main ways:

- To extend a type without breaking existing code
- To allow customization in specific cases most users won’t need

## Fully Qualified Syntax for Disambiguation: Calling Methods with the Same Name

Rust doesn't prevent traits from having a method with the same name as another trait's method, nor
does Rust prevent implementing both traits on one type. It's also possible to implement a method
directly on the type with the same name as methods from traits.

```rust
trait Pilot {
    fn fly(&self);
}

trait Wizard {
    fn fly(&self);
}

struct Human;

impl Pilot for Human {
    fn fly(&self) {
        println!("This is your captain speaking.");
    }
}

impl Wizard for Human {
    fn fly(&self) {
        println!("Up!");
    }
}

impl Human {
    fn fly(&self) {
        println!("*waving arms furiously*");
    }
}

fn main() {
    let person = Human;
    Pilot::fly(&person);  // `fly` on Pilot
    Wizard::fly(&person); // `fly` on Wizard
    person.fly();         // `fly` on Human
}
```

- Look at `main`. This is how we'd distinguish between which `fly` to use.

Associated functions that aren't methods don't have a `self` parameter. When there's multiple types
or traits that define non-method functions with the same function name, Rust doesn't know which type
to use. We use *fully qualified syntax* to address this, which is defined as:

```
<Type as Trait>::function(receiver_if_method, next_arg, ...);
```

Here is an example of utilizing *fully qualified syntax*:

```rust
trait Animal {
    fn baby_name() -> String;
}

struct Dog;

impl Dog {
    fn baby_name() -> String {
        String::from("Spot")
    }
}

impl Animal for Dog {
    fn baby_name() -> String {
        String::from("puppy")
    }
}

fn main() {
    println!("A baby dog is called a {}", Dog::baby_name());             // `baby_name` defined on Dog
    println!("A baby dog is called a {}", <Dog as Animal>::baby_name()); // fully qualified syntax used here
}
```

## Using Supertraits to Require One Trait's Functionality Within Another Trait

A *supertrait* is one that's kind of like the "parent" of another trait. That is, the other trait
relies on this other trait called the *supertrait*. To make these traits work on a particular type,
that type needs to implement both the supertrait and the other trait; only then will the new type be
able to properly utilize associated items. Here's an example:

```rust
trait OutlinePrint: fmt::Display {
    fn outline_print(&self) {
        let output = self.to_string();
        let len = output.len();
        println!("{}", "*".repeat(len + 4));
        println!("*{}*", " ".repeat(len + 2));
        println!("* {output} *");
        println!("*{}*", " ".repeat(len + 2));
        println!("{}", "*".repeat(len + 4));
    }
}

struct Point {
    x: i32,
    y: i32,
}

impl OutlinePrint for Point {}  // outline_work won't work here yet b/c
                                // Point doesn't implement Display

use std::fmt;

impl fmt::Display for Point {   // after this outline_work will work
    fn fmt(&self, f: &mut fmt::Formatter) -> fmt::Result {
        write!(f, "({}, {})", self.x, self.y)
    }
}

fn main() {
    let p = Point { x: 1, y: 3 };
    p.outline_print();
}
```
```
**********
*        *
* (1, 3) *
*        *
**********
```

## Using the Newtype Pattern to Implement External Traits on External Types

Recall the orphan rule that states we're only allowed to implement a trait on a type if either the
trait or the type are local to our crate. It's possible to get around this restriction using the
*newtype pattern*, which involves creating a new type in a tuple struct. The tuple struct will have
one field and be a wrapper around the type we want to implement a trait for. Then the wrapper type
is local to our crate, and we can implement the trait on the wrapper.
- *Newtype* is a term originating from Haskell.
- There's no runtime performance penalty for using this pattern, and the wrapper type is elided at
  compile time.

e.g., say we want to implement `Display` on `Vec<T>`. The orphan rule prevents us from doing this directly because `Display` and `Vec<T>` are defined outside our crate. We can make a `Wrapper` struct that holds an instance of `Vec<T>`, and then we can implement `Display` on `Wrapper` and use the `Vec<T>` value:

```rust
use std::fmt;

struct Wrapper(Vec<String>);

impl fmt::Display for Wrapper {
    fn fmt(&self, f: &mut fmt::Formatter) -> fmt::Result {
        write!(f, "[{}]", self.0.join(", "))
    }
}

fn main() {
    let w = Wrapper(vec![String::from("hello"), String::from("world")]);
    println!("w = {w}");
}
```
```
w = [hello, world]
```

The downside of this technique is that `Wrapper` is a new type, so it doesn't have the methods of
the value it's holding. We'd have to implement all the methods of `Vec<T>` directly on `Wrapper`
such that the methods delegate to `self.0`, allowing us to treat `Wrapper` exactly like a `Vec<T>`.
If we wanted the new type to have every method the inner type has, implementing the `Deref` trait on
`Wrapper` to return the inner type would be a solution. If we don't want the `Wrapper` type to have
all the methods of the inner type, we'd have to implement just the methods we do want manually.

## Quiz

> 1. Recall the definition of the Add trait:
>    
>    ```rust
>    trait Add<Rhs=Self> {
>        type Output;
>        fn add(self, rhs: Rhs) -> Self::Output;
>    }
>    ```
>    
>    Which of the following best describes why Output is an associated type, while Rhs is a type
>    parameter?
>    
>    ***Answer***: A type `T` should be addable to many other types `S`, but a given `T + S`
>    operation should always have a single output type.
>    
>    **Context**: It is true that an associated type cannot currently have a default, but that's not
>    the main motivating factor for having `Rhs` be a type parameter in the `Add` trait.
> 
> ---
> 
> 2. Recall the definition of the `Add` trait:
>    
>    ```rust
>    trait Add<Rhs=Self> {
>        type Output;
>        fn add(self, rhs: Rhs) -> Self::Output;
>    }
>    ```
>    
>    Which of the following best describes why Rhs is a type parameter to the trait Add rather than
>    the function add? That is, why is Add not designed like this:
>    
>    ```rust
>    trait Add {
>        type Output;
>        fn add<Rhs>(self, rhs: Rhs) -> Self::Output;
>    }
>    ```
>    
>    ***Answer***: If `Rhs` were a function-level type parameter, then the definition of `add`
>    couldn't assume any structure to `Rhs`
>    
>    **Context**: Such a design would not make much sense because `add<Rhs>` would not have any
>    information about the structure of `Rhs`, so it would be impossible to implement any sensible
>    addition function this way.
> 
> ---
> 
> 3. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output
>    of the program if it were executed.
>    
>    ```rust
>    mod inner {
>        pub trait A {
>            fn f(&self) -> usize { 0 }
>        }
>        pub trait B {
>            fn f(&self) -> usize { 1 }
>        }
>        pub struct P;
>        impl A for P {}
>        impl B for P {}
>    }
>    fn main() {
>        use inner::{P, B};    
>        println!("{}", P.f());    
>    }
>    ```
>    
>    ***Answer***: Does compile. `1`
>    
>    **Context**: When only one of two conflicting trait implementations is imported, then Rust uses
>    the imported implementation. Fully-qualified syntax is not necessary here.
> 
> ---
> 
> 4. Consider implementing a trait `Trait` for a type `T`. In which of the following situations do
>    you need to wrap `T`in a newtype?
> 
>    ***Answer***: `Trait` is defined in an external crate and `T` is defined in an external crate.
>    
>    **Context**: The orphan rule dictates that a trait cannot be implemented for a type if both are
>    defined in an external crate, thus necessitating a newtype. If either the trait or the type are
>    defined locally, then a newtype is unnecessary.
