# Advanced Types

## Using the Newtype Pattern for Type Safety and Abstraction

The newtype pattern is also useful for statically enforcing that values are never confused and
indicating the units of a value. Recall that the `Millimeters` and `Meters` structs wrapped `u32`
values in a newtype. If we wrote a function with a parameter of type `Millimeters`, we couldn't
compile a program that accidentally tried to call that function with a value of type `Meters` or a
plain `u32`.

We can also use the newtype pattern to abstract away some implementation details of a type: the new
type can expose a public API that's different from the API of the private inner type.

Newtypes can also hide internal implementation. e.g., we could provide a `People` type to
wrap a `HashMap<i32, String>` that stores a person's ID associated with their name. Code using
`People` would only interact with the public API we provide, such as a method to add a name string
to the `People` collection; that code wouldn't need to know that we assign an `i32` ID to names
internally. The newtype pattern is a lightweight way to achieve encapsulation to hide implementation
details.

## Creating Type Synonyms with Type Aliases

Rust provides the ability to declare a type alias to give an existing type another name. For this we
use the `type` keyword.

The reason we'd use *type synonyms* is to reduce repetition. e.g., `Box<dyn Fn() + Send + 'static>` would be pretty annoying to write in the type signature of multiple functions. Instead of doing that, we can use the `type` keyword to create a type with a different name that's synonymous to the lengthier type (they're the same):

```rust
    type Thunk = Box<dyn Fn() + Send + 'static>;

    let f: Thunk = Box::new(|| println!("hi"));

    fn takes_long_type(f: Thunk) {
        // --snip--
    }

    fn returns_long_type() -> Thunk {
        // --snip--
    }
```

## The Never Type that Never Returns

Rust has a special type named `!` that's known in type theory lingo as the *empty type* because it has no values. We prefer to call it the *never type* because it stands in the place of the return type when a function will never return.

```rust
fn bar() -> ! {
    panic!();
}
```

- This code reads as "the function `bar` returns never." Functions that return never are called
  *diverging functions*. We can't create values of the type `!` so `bar` can never possibly return.
- `panic!` has the type `!`; it doesn't produce a value, just ends the program.

## Dynamically Sized Types and the Sized Trait

Rust needs to know certain details about its types, such as how much space to allocate for values of
a particular type. This leaves one corner of the type system a little confusing at first: the
concept of *dynamically sized types* (*DSTs* or *unsized types*), these types let us write code
using values whose size we can know only at runtime.

The type `str` (not `&str`) is a DST. We can't know how long the string is until runtime, meaning we
can't create a variable of type `str`, nor can we take an argument of type `str`. The following
doesn't work:

```rust
    let s1: str = "Hello there!";
    let s2: str = "How's it going?";
```

- Rust needs to know how much memory to allocate for any value of a particular type, and all values
  of a type must use the same amount of memory. If Rust allowed us to write this code, these two
  `str` values would need to take up the same amount of space. But they have different lengths: `s1`
  needs 12 bytes and `s2` needs 15. This is why it's not possible to create a variable holding a
  DST.

So what now? In this case, we make the types of `s1` and `s2` `&str` rather than `str`. Recall that
the slice data structure just stores the starting position and the length of the slice. So although
a `&T` is a single value that stores the memory address of where the `T` is located, a `&str` is two
values: the address of the `str` and its length. As such, we know the size of `&str` at compile
time: it's twice the length of a `usize` (we always know the size of a `&str` no matter how long the
string it refers to is). In general, this is how DSTs are used in Rust: they have an extra bit of
metadata that stores the size of the dynamic information. The golden rule of DSTs is that we must
always put values of dynamically sized types behind a pointer of some kind.

We can combine str with all kinds of pointers (e.g., `Box<str>` or `Rc<str>`). We've seen this
before just with a different dynamically sized type: traits. Every trait is a dynamically sized type
we can refer to by the name of the trait. We mentioned that to use traits as trait objects, we must
put them behind a pointer, such as `&dyn Trait` or `Box<dyn Trait>`.

To work with DSTs, Rust provides the `Sized` trait to determine whether or not a type's size is known at compile time. This trait is automatically implemented for everything whose size is known at compile time. In addition, Rust implicitly adds a bound on `Sized` to every generic function. A generic funciton definition like this:

```rust
fn generic<T>(t: T) {
    // --snip--
}
```

is treated as though we wrote this:

```rust
fn generic<T: Sized>(t: T) {
    // --snip--
}
```

By default, generic functions only work on types that have a known size at compile time. However,
you can use the following special syntax to relax this restriction:

```rust
fn generic<T: ?Sized>(t: &T) {
    // --snip--
}
```

- A trait bound on `?Sized` means "`T` may or may not be `Sized`" and this notation overrides the
  default that generic types must have a known size at compile time.
  - The `?Trait` syntax with this meaning is only available for `Sized`, not any other traits.
- Also notice we switched the type of the `t` parameter from `T` to `&T`. B/c the type might not be
  `Sized`, we need to use it behind some kind of pointer. In this case, we've chosen a reference.

## Quiz

> 1. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output
>    of the program if it were executed.
> 
>    ```rust
>    fn expect_none(x: Option<i32>) -> ! {
>        match x {
>            Some(n) => panic!("Expected none, found Some({n})"),
>            None => ()
>        }
>    }
>    fn main() {
>        println!("{:?}", expect_none(None));
>    ```
>    
>    ***Answer***: Doesn't compile.
>    
>    **Context**: The `!` type isn't the right return type for this function b/c it only panics some
>    of the time, not all of the time.
> 
> 2. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output
>    of the program if it were executed.
> 
>    ```rust
>    fn is_equal<T: Eq>(t1: &T, t2: &T) -> bool {
>      t1 == t2
>    }
>    fn main() {
>      println!("{}", is_equal("Hello", "world"));
>    }
>    ```
>    
>    ***Answer***: Doesn't compile.
>    
>    **Context**: The call to `is_equal` passes values of type `&str`. That means `T` = `str`.
>    However, str is only allowed to be used in such a generic function if `T` is marked as
>    `?Sized`.
