# Advanced Functions and Closures

## Function Pointers

Regular functions can be passed to other functions. This technique is useful when wanting to pass a
function already defined rather than defining a new closure. Functions coerce to the type `fn` (not
to be confused with `Fn` closure trait). The `fn` type is called a *function pointer*. Passing
functions with function pointers will allow using functions as arguments to other functions.

Function pointer parameter syntax is like that of closures. For example:

```rust
fn add_one(x: i32) -> i32 {
    x + 1
}

fn do_twice(f: fn(i32) -> i32, arg: i32) -> i32 {
    f(arg) + f(arg)
}

fn main() {
    let answer = do_twice(add_one, 5);

    println!("The answer is: {answer}");
}
```
```
The answer is: 12
```

- The type annotation for `f` in `do_twice` is `fn(i32) -> i32`. `fn(_)` denotes the function
  pointer. In this way it's saying, "the function pointer `f` takes in an `i32` and outputs an
  `i32`."

Unlike closures, `fn` is a type rather than a trait, so we specify `fn` as the parameter type
directly rather than declaring a generic type parameter with one of the `Fn` traits as a trait
bound.

- Function pointers implement all three of the closure traits (`Fn`, `FnMut`, and `FnOnce`), meaning
  you can always pass a function pointer as an argument for a function that expects a closure. It's
  best to write functions using a generic type and one of the closure traits so your functions can
  accept either functions or closures.
  - That said, one example of where you would want to only accept `fn` and not closures is when
    interfacing with external code that doesn't have closures: C functions can accept functions as
    arguments, but doesn't have closures.

Recall that the name of each enum variant defined also becomes an initializer function. We can use
these initializer functions as function pointers that implement the closure traits, which means we
can specify the initializer functions as arguments for methods that take closures, like so:

```rust
    enum Status {
        Value(u32),
        Stop,
    }

    let list_of_statuses: Vec<Status> = (0u32..20).map(Status::Value).collect();
```

- We create `Status::Value` instances using each `u32` value in the range that `map` is called on by
  using the initializer function of `Status::Value`.
- Some people prefer this style, others prefer closures. They compile to the same code anyways.

## Returning Closures

Closures are represented by traits, which means you can't return closures directly. In most cases
where you might want to return a trait, you can use the concrete type that implements the trait as
the function's return type. However, that can't be done with closure b/c they don't have a concrete
type that's returnable.

The following tries to return a closure, but won't compile:

```rust
fn returns_closure() -> dyn Fn(i32) -> i32 {
    |x| x + 1
}
```
```$ cargo build
   Compiling functions-example v0.1.0 (file:///projects/functions-example)
error[E0746]: return type cannot have an unboxed trait object
 --> src/lib.rs:1:25
  |
1 | fn returns_closure() -> dyn Fn(i32) -> i32 {
  |                         ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ doesn't have a size known at compile-time
  |
help: consider returning an `impl Trait` instead of a `dyn Trait`
  |
1 | fn returns_closure() -> impl Fn(i32) -> i32 {
  |                         ~~~~
help: alternatively, box the return type, and wrap all of the returned values in `Box::new`
  |
1 ~ fn returns_closure() -> Box<dyn Fn(i32) -> i32> {
2 ~     Box::new(|x| x + 1)
  |

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0746`.
error: could not compile `functions-example` (lib) due to 1 previous error
```

The errors refers to the `Sized` trait. Rust doesn't know how much space is needed to store the
closure. One solution to this involves a trait object:

```rust
fn returns_closure() -> Box<dyn Fn(i32) -> i32> {
    Box::new(|x| x + 1)
}
```

## Quiz

> 1. Consider implementing a `register` function that takes a callback in two ways:
>    
>    ```rust
>    fn register1(cb: fn(Event) -> ());
>    fn register2<F>(cb: F) where F: Fn(Event) -> ();
>    ```
>    
>    Which type signature permits register to take the widest variety of arguments?
>    
>    ***Answer***: `register2`
>    
>    **Context**: Closures with environments can be passed to `register2`, while only top-level
>    functions (or closures without environments) can be passed to `register1`.
>    
>    Additionally, function pointers implement each possible closure trait, meaning that can be used
>    inside whichever closure trait (`Fn`, `FnMut`, `FnOnce`). But not all closures can be used with
>    the function pointer type `fn`.
