# Macros

The term *macro* refers to a family of features in Rust: *declarative* macros with `macro_rules!`,
and three kinds of *procedural* macros.

## The Difference Between Macros and Functions

Basically, macros are a way to write code that writes code (aka *metaprogramming*). Think `println!`
and `vec!`, they produce more code than what was written.

- The `derive` trait generates an implementation of various traits for us.

**Metaprogramming** is useful for reducing the amount of code needing to be written and maintained,
which is also one of the roles of functions. However, macros have some additional powers that
functions don’t.

- A function signature must declare the number and type of parameters the function has. Instead
  macros can take a variable number of parameters (think `println!("hello")` or `println!("hello
  {}", name)`).
- Macros are expanded before the compiler interprets the meaning of the code. e.g. a macro can
  implement a trait on a given type, but a function can't b/c it gets called at runtime and a trait
  needs to be implemented at compile time.

The downside to implementing a macro instead of a function is that macro definitions are more
complex than function definitions b/c we're writing Rust code that writes Rust code. Due to this
indirection, macro definitions are more difficult to read, understand, and maintain than function
definitions.

Another difference between macros and functions is that we must define macros or bring them into
scope before calling them in a file. Whereas functions can be defined and called anywhere.

## Declarative Macros with `macro_rules!` for General Metaprogramming

The *declarative* macro is the most commonly used. Fundamentally, declarative macros allow writing
something similar to a `match` expression. They compare a value to patterns that're associated with
particular code. In this situation, the value is the literal Rust source code passed to the macro;
the patterns are compared with the structure of that source code, and the code associated with each
pattern (when matched) replaces the code passed to the macro (all during compilation).

To define a macro, you use the `macro_rules!` construct. Let's explore how to use `macro_rules!` by
looking at how `vec!` is defined (slightly simplified definition):

```rust
#[macro_export]
macro_rules! vec {
    ( $( $x:expr ),* ) => {
        {
            let mut temp_vec = Vec::new();
            $(
                temp_vec.push($x);
            )*
            temp_vec
        }
    };
}
```

> The actual definition of `vec!` in the stdlib includes code to preallocate the correct amount of
> memory up front. That code is an optimization not included here to make the example simpler.

- The `#[macro_export]` annotation indicates that this macro should be made available whenever the
  crate in which the macro is defined is brought into scope. Without this annotation, the macro
  can't be brought into scope.
- the macro definition starts with `macro_rules!`, then the name of the macro being defined w/o the
  exclamation mark. The name (in this case `vec`) is followed by curly brackets denoting the body of
  the macro definition.
- The structure in the `vec!` body is similar to the structure of a `match` expression. Here we have
  one arm with the pattern `( $( $x:expr ),* )`, followed by `=>` and the block of code associated
  with this pattern. If the pattern matches, the associated block of code will be emitted.
  - Given that this is the only pattern in this macro, there's only one valid way to match; any
    other pattern will error out. More complex macros will have more than one arm.
- Valid pattern syntax in macro definitions is different than regular pattern syntax b/c macro
  patterns are matched against Rust code structure instead of values. e.g., declarative macros can
  match against expressions (`expr`), types (`ty`), and even entire items (`item`).

Let's walk through what the pattern pieces in the prior code mean (for the full macro pattern
syntax, check out the [Rust Reference](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/macros-by-example.html)):

1. Use a set of parentheses to encompass the whole pattern. We use a `$` to declare a variable in
   the macro system that'll contain the Rust code matching the pattern. The `$` makes it clear this
   is a macro variable as opposed to a regular Rust variable.
2. The following set of parentheses captures values that match the pattern within it for use in the
   replacement code. Within `$()` is `$x:expr`, which matches any Rust expression and gives the
   expression the name `$x`.
3. The comma following `$()` indicates that a literal comma could optionally appear after the code
   that matches the code in `$()`. The `*` specifies that the pattern matches zero or more of
   whatever precedes the `*`.
4. When we call this macro with `vec![1, 2, 3]`;, the `$x` pattern matches three times with the
   three expressions `1`, `2`, and `3`.

Now let's look at the pattern in the body of the code associated with this arm:

1. `temp_vec.push()` within `$()*` is generated for each part that matches `$()` in the pattern;
   this happens zero or more times depending on how many times the pattern matches.
2. The `$x` is replaced with each expression matched.
3. When we call this macro with `vec![1, 2, 3];`, the code generated that replaces this macro call
   will be the following:
   ```rust
   {
       let mut temp_vec = Vec::new();
       temp_vec.push(1);
       temp_vec.push(2);
       temp_vec.push(3);
       temp_vec
   }
   ```

Put these two things together and we get macro that can take any number of arguments (of any type)
and will generate code to create a vector containing the specified elements.

- To learn more about how to write macros, consult the docs or other resources
  (e.g. ["The Little Book of Rust Macros"](https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/)).

## Procedural Macros for Generating Code from Attributes

The second macro form is the *procedural macro*, which acts more like a function (and is a type of procedure). Procedural macros accept code as an input, operate on that code, and then produce some code as an output (rather than matching against patterns and replacing the code with other code like declarative macros). The three kinds of procedural macros are:

- Custom `#[derive]` macros that specify code added with the derive attribute used on structs and
  enums.
- Attribute-like macros that define custom attributes usable on any item.
- Function-like macros that look like function calls but operate on the tokens specified as their
  argument.

Procedural macro definitions must reside in their own crate with a special crate type. This is for
complex technical reasons that'll hopefully be eliminated in the future. The following code shows
how to define a procedural macro, where `some_attribute` is a placeholder for using a specific macro
variety:

```rust
use proc_macro;

#[some_attribute]
pub fn some_name(input: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
}
```

- The function that defines a procedural macro takes a `TokenStream` as an input and produces a
  `TokenStream` as an output.
- The `TokenStream` type is defined by the `proc_macro` crate (included with Rust) and represents a
  sequence of tokens. This is the core of the macro: the source code that the macro is operating on
  makes up the input `TokenStream`, and the code the macro produces is the output `TokenStream`.
- The function also has an attribute attached to it that specifies which kind of procedural macro
  we're creating. We can have multiple kinds of procedural macros in the same crate.

## How to Write a Custom derive Macro

We'll create a crate called `hello_macro` that defines a trait named `HelloMacro` with one
associated function named `hello_macro`. We'll provide a procedural macro so users can annotate
their type with `#[derive(HelloMacro)]` to get a default implementation of the `hello_macro`
function. The default implementation will print `Hello, Macro! My name is TypeName!`, where
`TypeName` is the name of the type on which this trait has been defined. Users will be able to
write code like this:

```rust
use hello_macro::HelloMacro;
use hello_macro_derive::HelloMacro;

#[derive(HelloMacro)]
struct Pancakes;

fn main() {
    Pancakes::hello_macro();
}
```
```
Hello, Macro! My name is Pancakes!
```

In *hello_macro/lib.rs*, add:

```rust
pub trait HelloMacro {
    fn hello_macro();
}
```

The next step is to define the procedural macro. At the time this was written, procedural macros
need to be in their own crate. The convention for structuring crates and macro crates is as follows:
for a crate named `foo`, a custom derive procedural macro crate is called `foo_derive`. Start a new
crate called `hello_macro_derive` inside `hello_macro`.

- The two crates are tightly related, so the procedural macro crate is w/in the directory of
  `hello_macro` crate. If we change the trait definition in `hello_macro`, the implementation of the
  procedural macro in `hello_macro_derive` needs to change as well.
- The two crates will need to be published separately, and programmers using these crates will need
  to add both as dependencies and bring them both into scope. We could instead have the
  `hello_macro` crate use `hello_macro_derive` as a dependency and re-export the procedural macro
  code. However, the way we've structured the project makes it possible for programmers to use
  `hello_macro` even if they don't want the derive functionality.

In *hello_macro_derive/Cargo.toml*, we'll need to declare the `hello_macro_derive` crate as a
procedural macro crate, and also add `syn` and `quote` crates as dependencies:

```toml
[lib]
proc-macro = true

[dependencies]
syn = "2.0"
quote = "1.0"
```

Now add the following to *hello_macro_derive/src/lib.rs* (the code won't compile until we add
`impl_hello_macro`):

```rust
use proc_macro::TokenStream;
use quote::quote;

#[proc_macro_derive(HelloMacro)]
pub fn hello_macro_derive(input: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
    // Construct a representation of Rust code as a syntax tree
    // that we can manipulate
    let ast = syn::parse(input).unwrap();

    // Build the trait implementation
    impl_hello_macro(&ast)
}
```

There's now three new crates: `proc_macro`, `syn`, and `quote`. `proc_macro` crate is the compiler's
API that allows us to read and manipulate Rust code from our code.

`syn` crate parses Rust code from a string into a data structure that we can perform operations on.
The `quote` crate turns `syn` data structures back into Rust code. These crates make it much simpler
to parse Rust code we might want to handle (writing a full parser for Rust is no simple task.)

`hello_macro_derive` will be called when a user of our library specifies `#[derive(HelloMacro)]` on
a type. This is possible because we've annotated the `hello_macro_derive` function here with
`proc_macro_derive` and specified the name `HelloMacro` (matches our trait name)

- This is the convention most procedural macros follow.

`hello_macro_derive` first converts the input from a `TokenStream` to a data structure that we can
then interpret and perform operations on. Enter `syn`. The parse function in `syn` takes a
`TokenStream` and returns a `DeriveInput` struct representing the parsed Rust code. The following
shows the relevant parts of the `DeriveInput` struct we get from parsing the `struct Pancakes;`
string:

```rust
DeriveInput {
    // --snip--

    ident: Ident {
        ident: "Pancakes",
        span: #0 bytes(95..103)
    },
    data: Struct(
        DataStruct {
            struct_token: Struct,
            fields: Unit,
            semi_token: Some(
                Semi
            )
        }
    )
}
```

- Check out the [`syn` docs for `DeriveInput`](https://docs.rs/syn/2.0/syn/struct.DeriveInput.html)
  to learn about all the fields that describe Rust code.

Now that we have the code to turn the annotated Rust code from a `TokenStream` into a `DeriveInput`
instance, create the code that implements the `HelloMacro` trait on the annotated type:

```rust
fn impl_hello_macro(ast: &syn::DeriveInput) -> TokenStream {
    let name = &ast.ident;
    let gen = quote! {
        impl HelloMacro for #name {
            fn hello_macro() {
                println!("Hello, Macro! My name is {}!", stringify!(#name));
            }
        }
    };
    gen.into()
}
```

- We get an `Ident` struct instance containing the name (identifier) of the annotated type using
  `ast.ident`.
- `quote!` lets us define the Rust code that we want to return. The compiler expects something
  different to the direct result of the `quote!` macro's execution, so we need to convert it to
  `TokenStream`. Do this by calling `into`, which returns a value of `TokenStream` type.
  - The `quote!` macro also provides templating mechanics: we can enter `#name`, and `quote!` will
    replace it with the value in the variable name. For a thorough introduction, check out
    [`quote`'s docs](https://docs.rs/quote).
- Our procedural macro should generate an implementation of our `HelloMacro` trait for the type the
  user annotated, which we can get by using `#name`. The trait implementation has the one function
  `hello_macro`, whose body prints `Hello, Macro! My name is` and then the name of the annotated
  type.
- `stringify!` is built into Rust. It takes a Rust expression and turns it into a string literal at
  compile time. There's a possibility that the `#name` input might be an expression to print
  literally, so we use `stringify!`.
  - Using `stringify!` also saves an allocation by converting `#name` to a string literal at compile
    time.

## Attribute-like Macros

Attribute-like macros are similar to custom derive macros, but instead of generating code for the
`derive` attribute, they allow creating new attributes. They're also more flexible: `derive` only
works for structs and enums; attributes can be applied to other items as well, such as functions.

Here's an example of using an attribute-like macro: say you have an attribute named `route` that
annotates functions when using a web application framework:

```rust
#[route(GET, "/")]
fn index() {
```

This `#[route]` attribute would be defined by the framework as a procedural macro. The signature of
the macro definition function would look like this:

```rust
#[proc_macro_attribute]
pub fn route(attr: TokenStream, item: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
```

- There's two parameters of type `TokenStream`. The first is for the contents of the attribute: the
  `GET, "/"` part. The second is the body of the item the attribute is attached to: in this case,
  `fn index() {}` and the rest of the function's body.

Other than that, attribute-like macros work the same way as custom derive macros: you create a crate
with the proc-`macro` crate type and implement a function that generates the code you want.

## Function-like Macros

Function-like macros define macros that look like function calls. They're more flexible than regular
functions (e.g., they can take an unknown number of arguments). However, `macro_rules!` macros can
be defined only using the match-like syntax. Function-like macros take a `TokenStream` parameter and
their definition manipulates that `TokenStream` using Rust code as the other two types of procedural
macros do. An example of a function-like macro is an `sql!` macro that might be called like so:

```rust
let sql = sql!(SELECT * FROM posts WHERE id=1);
```

This macro would parse the SQL statement inside it and check that it's syntactically correct, which
is much more complex processing than a `macro_rules!` macro can do. The `sql!` macro would be
defined like this:

```rust
#[proc_macro]
pub fn sql(input: TokenStream) -> TokenStream {
```

This definition is similar to the custom derive macro's signature: we receive the tokens that are
inside the parentheses and return the code we wanted to generate.

## Quiz

> 1. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output
>    of the program if it were executed.
> 
>    ```rust
>    macro_rules! manylet {
>        ( $( $i:ident ),* = $e:expr ) => {
>            $(
>                let mut $i = $e;
>            )*
>        }
>    }
>    fn main() {
>        let mut s = String::from("A");
>        manylet!(x, y = s);
>        x.push_str("B");
>        println!("{x}{y}");
>    }
>    ```
>    
>    ***Answer***: Doesn't compile.
>    
>    **Context**: `manylet` macro syntactically duplicates the expression `e` as a binding to each
>    variable on the left-hand side of the `=`. However, because `s` is an owned string, then the
>    first binding to `x` moves `s`, and the second binding to `y` is invalid.
> 
> ---
> 
> 2. Which of the following are valid reasons for implementing a macro as a procedural macro instead
>    of a declarative macro?
> 
>    ***Answer***:
>    
>    - You want to integrate with Rust's derive system
>    - Your macro requires nontrivial analysis of the macro user's syntax
>    
>    **Context**: Procedural macros are the only way to create a custom derive. Procedural macros
>    are also useful when you need code to analyze the macro user's syntax — declarative macros only
>    permit shuffling around the input, not computing its size for example.
>    
>    Declarative macros can generate variable-length sequences of code, and can wrap/produce items
>    and not just expressions.
> 
> ---
> 
> 3. Which of the following best describes the input to a procedural macro?
> 
>    ***Answer***: The input is a sequence of tokens
>    
>    **Context**: Procedural macros take as input (and produce as output) token streams. You can use
>    crates like `syn` to convert tokens to syntax trees.
