## To `panic!` or Not to `panic!`

When code panics, there’s no way to recover. You could call `panic!` for any error situation, whether recoverable or not, but then you’re making the decision that a situation is unrecoverable on behalf of the calling code. When choosing to return a `Result` value, you give the calling code the option to attempt to recover in a way that’s appropriate for its situation, or to decide that an `Err` value in that case is unrecoverable; so it calls `panic!` and turns the recoverable error into an unrecoverable one. Therefore, returning `Result` is a good default choice when defining a function that might fail.

In situations such as examples, prototype code, and tests, it’s more appropriate to write code that panics instead of returning a `Result`

### Examples, Prototype Code, and Tests
When you’re writing an example to illustrate some concept, including robust error-handling code can make the example less clear. In examples, it’s understood that a call to a method like `unwrap` that may panic is meant as a placeholder for the way you’d want your application to handle errors, which can differ based on what the rest of your code is doing.

Similarly, the unwrap and expect methods are very handy when prototyping, before you’re ready to decide how to handle errors. They leave clear markers in your code for when you’re ready to make your program more robust.

If a method call fails in a test, you’d want the whole test to fail, even if that method isn’t the functionality being tested. Because `panic!` is how a test is marked as a failure, calling `unwrap` or `expect` is exactly what should happen.

### Cases in Which You Have More Information Than the Compiler
If you can ensure by manually inspecting the code that you’ll never have an `Err` variant, it’s perfectly acceptable to call `unwrap`, and even better to document the reason you think you’ll never have an `Err` variant in the `expect` text. For example:
```rust
fn main() {
    use std::net::IpAddr;

    let home: IpAddr = "127.0.0.1"
        .parse()
        .expect("Hardcoded IP address should be valid");
}
```
- because `home` is an IP adress that's hard-coded, there's no room for error. So we use `expect` because there's no need for robust error-handling code. But if `home` was instead a product of user-input, then we would add some code to handle potential (and likely) errors.

### Guidelines for Error Handling
A panic is advisable when it’s possible that your code could end up in a bad state. A ***bad state*** is when some assumption, guarantee, contract, or invariant has been broken, such as when invalid values, contradictory values, or missing values are passed to your code AND one or more of the following:
- The *bad state* is something that is unexpected, as opposed to something that will likely happen occasionally, like a user entering data in the wrong format.
- Your code after this point needs to rely on not being in this bad state, rather than checking for the problem at every step.
- There’s not a good way to encode this information in the types you use. We’ll work through an example of what we mean in the “Encoding States and Behavior as Types” section of Chapter-17.

When failure is expected, it’s more appropriate to return a `Result` than to make a `panic!` call. Examples include a parser being given malformed data or an HTTP request returning a status that indicates you have hit a rate limit. In these cases, returning a `Result` indicates that failure is an expected possibility that the calling code must decide how to handle.

When your code performs an operation that could put a user at risk being called with invalid values, your code should verify the values are valid first and panic if they aren’t. This is mostly for safety reasons: attempting to operate on invalid data can expose your code to vulnerabilities. This is mainly why the standard library will call `panic!` if you attempt an out-of-bounds memory access. Functions often have contracts: their behavior is only guaranteed if the inputs meet particular requirements. Panicking when the contract is violated makes sense since a contract violation always indicates a caller-side bug and it’s not a kind of error you want the calling code to have to explicitly handle. In fact, there’s no reasonable way for calling code to recover; the calling programmers need to fix the code. Contracts for a function, especially when a violation will cause a panic, should be explained in the API documentation for the function.

### Creating Custom Types for Validation
Recall the guessing game from Chapter-2, we didn't validate the user's guess was between 1 and 100; instead we only prompted higher or lower. Let's create a custom type that will enforce that the user's guess can only be between 1 and 100, allowing modularity in the sense that we don't need to recheck this every time we call a function that requires that the number be between this partiuclar range:
```rust
pub struct Guess {
    value: i32,
}

impl Guess {
    pub fn new(val: i32) -> Guess {
        if val < 1 || val > 100 {
            panic!("Your guess must be between 1 and 100, got {}", val);
        }
        Guess { value: val }
    }

    pub fn value(&self) -> i32 {
        self.value
    }
}
```
- because the `value` field isn't defined with the `pub` keyword, we create a `getter` method to get the value of the `Guess` instance
- `Guess::new()` instanciates `Guess` by passing a value as an argument and checking for if the argument lies between the 1 and 100.

### Quiz
1. A Rust programmer is designing a library for writing command-line interfaces. As a part of this library, they are implementing a function to parse command-line flags provided by a user. Which implementation would be most appropriate for this domain?
```rust

fn parse_flag_v1(flag: &str) -> Result<String, String> {
  match flag.strip_prefix("--") {
    Some(no_dash) => Ok(no_dash.to_string()),
    None => Err(format!("Invalid flag {flag}"))
  }
}
fn parse_flag_v2(flag: &str) -> String {
  match flag.strip_prefix("--") {
    Some(no_dash) => no_dash.to_string(),
    None => panic!("Invalid flag {flag}")
  }
}
```
#### Answer:
`parse_flag_v1`. Here, the programmer would likely want to use a recoverable error (the Result). If a CLI user passes an incorrectly formatted flag, then the CLI library might want to provide additional help like displaying the possible set of flags. A panic would force the application to only show the panic message, and would probably be a worse user experience.