## Cargo Workspaces

As your project develops, you might find that the library crate continues to
get bigger and may want to split your package further into multiple library
crates. Cargo offers a feature called *workspaces* that can help manage
multiple related packages that are developed in tandem.

### Creating a Workspace

A ***workspace*** is a set of packages that share the same *Cargo.lock* and
output directory.

There are multiple ways to structure a workspace, so the following is just one
common way. There'll be a workspace containing a binary and two libraries. The
binary, which will provide the main functionality, will depend on the two
libraries. One library will provide an `add_one` function, and a second library
an `add_two` function. These three crates will be part of the same workspace.
Start by creating a parent directory for the workspace (in this case *add/*):
```
mkdir add
cd add
```
Now in the *add* directory, create a *Cargo.toml* file that'll configure the
entire workspace. Instead of having a `[package]`, the *Cargo.toml* file will
have a `[workspace]` section. This will allow adding members to the workspace
by specifying the path to the package containing the binary crate; we'll call
that package *adder* and place it in the root *Cargo.toml* file:
```toml
[workspace]

members = [
    "adder",
]
```
Next create the *adder* binary crate by running `cargo new` within the *add*
directory. Afterwards, the *add* project should look like this:
```
add
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── adder
│   ├── Cargo.toml
│   └── src
│       └── main.rs
└── target
```
The workspace has a *target* dir at top level where compiled artifacts will be
placed into; note that *adder* doesn't have it's own *target* dir. We can run
`cargo build` from anywhere and artifacts will still end up in *add/target*.
The target directory is strucutred like this because the crates in a workspace
are meant to depend on each other.
- If each crate had its own target directory, they'd have to recompile each of
  the other crates in the workspace to place the artifacts in their own target
  directories. By sharing one target directory, the crates can avoid
  unnecessary rebuilding.

### Creating the Second Package in the Workspace

Next, create another member package in the workspace called `add_one`. Change
the top-level *Cargo.toml* to specify the `add_one` path in the members list:
```toml
[workspace]

members = [
    "adder",
    "add_one",
]
```
Then create a new library crate named add_one (using `cargo new add_one
--lib`). The directory structure should now look like:
```
add
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── add_one
│   ├── Cargo.toml
│   └── src
│       └── lib.rs
├── adder
│   ├── Cargo.toml
│   └── src
│       └── main.rs
└── target
```
Pretend there's an `add_one` function in *add_one/src/lib.rs*. Now the binary
in the *adder* package can depend on *add_one* (which contains library). Add
path dependency on *add_one* to *adder/Cargo.toml*:
```toml
# adder/Cargo.toml
[dependencies]
add_one = { path = "../add_one" }
```
If we want to run a particular binary crate, use the -p flag. e.g.
`cargo run -p adder` in our case.

### Depending on an External Package in a Workspace

Having one *Cargo.lock* at the top level (rather than in each crate) ensures
that all crates use the same version of all dependencies, and therefore the
crates will always be compatible with each other.

Say we added `rand` crate to *add_one*, running `cargo build` (from top level)
will introduce information about how *add_one* is dependent on `rand`. But
note, this doesn't mean that all other crates can utilize `rand` as well. Their
*Cargo.toml* must also specify `rand` as a dependency.
- If crates in the workspace specify incompatible versions of the same
  dependency, Cargo will resolve each of them while still trying to resolve as
  few versions as possible
  
### Adding a Test to a Workspace

You can also add tests to a workspace and run tests in particular crates using
`cargo test -p <crate_name>` (much like with `cargo run`).

### Publishing a Crate to crates.io from a Workspace

Additionally, if you want to publish a crate that's inside a workspace to
crates.io, you're going to have to do that separately. Fortunately, you can
also use the -p flag with publish as well; e.g. `cargo publish -p add_one`.