## Futures and Async Syntax

The key elements of asynchronous programming in Rust are ***futures*** and Rust's `async` and
`await` keywords.

A *future* is a value which may not be ready now, but will become ready at some point in the future.
Rust provides a `Future` trait as a building block so different async operations can be implemented
with different data structures, but with a common interface. Types that implement `Future` are
futures. Each type which implements `Future` holds its own information about the progress that has
been made and what "ready" means.

The `async` keyword can be applied to blocks and functions to specify that they can be interrupted
and resumed.
- Within an async block/function, you can use the `await` keyword to wait for a future to become
  ready (called *awaiting a future*).
- Each place you await a future within an async block/function is a place that async block/function
  may get paused and resumed.

Let's write our first async program: a little web scraper. We will pass in two URLs from the command
line, fetch both of them concurrently, and return the result of whichever one finishes first.

### Our First Async Program

To keep this chapter focused on learning async, rather than juggling parts of the ecosystem, use the
`trpl` crate (trpl = "The Rust Programming Language"). It re-exports all the types, traits, and
functions needed, primarily from the `futures` and `tokio` crates.
- `futures` crate is an official home for Rust experimentation with async code. It's where the
  `Future` type was originally designed.
- Tokio is the most widely used async runtime in Rust today, especially (but not only!) for web
  applications. `trpl` uses Tokio under the hood b/c it's good and widely used.

Build a little command line tool which fetches two web pages, pulls the `<title>` element from each,
and prints out the title of whichever finishes that whole process first.

```rust
use trpl::Html;

async fn page_title(url: &str) -> Option<String> {
    let response = trpl::get(url).await;
    let response_text = response.text().await;
    Html::parse(&response_text)
        .select_first("title")
        .map(|title_element| title_element.inner_html())
}
```
- the function `trpl::get` getches whatever URL is passed to it and awaits a response with `await`
  keyword. This waits for the server to send back the first part of its response, which will include
  HTTP headers, cookies, etc.
- the type of the response from `trpl::get` has a `text` method, call `await` on that too.
- we have to explicitly await both of these futures because futures in Rust are lazy: they don’t do
  anything until you ask them to with `await`.
- `await` is a *postfix keyword*, meaning that it goes after the expression you're awaiting. It can make chains of methods nicer to work with. e.g.:
  ```rust
  let response_text = trpl::get(url).await.text().await;
  ```

When Rust sees a **block** marked with the `async` keyword, it's compiled into a unique, anonymous
data type which implements the `Future` trait. When Rust sees a **function** marked with `async`,
it's compiled into a non-async function whose body is an async block. Thus, an async function's
return type is that of the anonymous data type the compiler creates for that block.

So, writing `async fn` is equivalent to writing a function which returns a future of the return type. For example:
```rust
use std::future::Future;
use trpl::Html;

fn page_title(url: &str) -> impl Future<Output = Option<String>> + '_ {
    async move {
        let text = trpl::get(url).await.text().await;
        Html::parse(&text)
            .select_first("title")
            .map(|title| title.inner_html())
    }
}
```
- uses the `impl Trait` syntax from Chapter 10.
- The returned trait is a `Future`, with an associated type of `Output`. The `Output` type is
  `Option<String>`, which is the same as the the original return type from the `async fn` version of
  `page_title`.
- All of the code called in the body of the original function is wrapped in an `async move` block.
  Blocks are expressions so this whole block is the expression returned from the function.
- This async block produces a value with the type `Option<String>`. That value matches the `Output`
  type in the return type.
- The new function body is an `async move` block because of how it uses the `name` argument.
- The new version has a `'_` lifetime. B/c the function returns a `Future` that refers to a
  reference (from `url`), we need to tell Rust that we want that reference to be inclueded. We don't
  need to name it here b/c Rust knows there's only one reference that could be involved, but we do
  have to be explicit that the resulting `Future` is bound by that lifetime.

Now to call `page_title` in `main`:
```rust
async fn main() {
    let args: Vec<String> = std::env::args().collect();
    let url = &args[1];
    match page_title(url).await {
        Some(title) => println!("The title for {url} was {title}"),
        None => println!("{url} had no title"),
    }
}
```
- this code won't compile because `main` isn't allowed to be `async`. The reason is that async code
  needs a *runtime*: a Rust crate which manages the details of executing asynchronous code. A
  program's `main` can initialize a runtime, but it's not a runtime itself. Every async program in
  Rust has at least one place where it sets up a runtime and executes the futures.

For the rest of this chapter, we'll use the `run` function from the `trpl` crate.
- `run` takes a future as an argument and runs it to completion. Calling `run` also sets up a
  runtime behind the scenes used to run the future passed in. Once the future completes, `run`
  returns what value the future produced.

Now to fix our `main`:
```rust
fn main() {
    let args: Vec<String> = std::env::args().collect();
    trpl::run(async {
        let url = &args[1];
        match page_title(url).await {
            Some(title) => println!("The title for {url} was {title}"),
            None => println!("{url} had no title"),
        }
    })
}
```

Each *await point* (every place where `await` is used) represents a place where control gets handed
back to the runtime. To make that work, Rust needs to keep track of the state involved in the async
block so that the runtime can kick off some other work and then come back when it is ready to try
advancing this one again. This is an invisible state machine.
- normal borrowing and ownership rules around data structures all apply. Happily, the compiler also
  handles checking those for us, and has good error messages.
- something has to execute the state machine. That something is a runtime. You may come across
  references to *executors* when looking into runtimes: an executor is the part of a runtime
  responsible for executing the async code. 

Let's put this stuff together and call `page_title` with 2 different URLs from the CLI and race
them:
```rust
use trpl::{Either, Html};

fn main() {
    let args: Vec<String> = std::env::args().collect();

    trpl::run(async {
      // call page_title on both URLs supplied and save them
        let title_fut_1 = page_title(&args[1]);
        let title_fut_2 = page_title(&args[2]);

        // pass both to trpl::race, figure out which one finishes first, and return that one
        let (url, maybe_title) = match trpl::race(title_fut_1, title_fut_2).await {
            Either::Left(left) => left,
            Either::Right(right) => right,
        };

        println!("{url} returned first");
        match maybe_title {
            Some(title) => println!("Its page title is: '{title}'"),
            None => println!("Its title could not be parsed."),
        }
    })
}

async fn page_title(url: &str) -> (&str, Option<String>) {
    let text = trpl::get(url).await.text().await;
    let title = Html::parse(&text)
        .select_first("title")
        .map(|title| title.inner_html());
    (url, title)
}
```

### Quiz
1. If you want to wait on a future in non-async code, you should do what?
***Answer:*** Give the future to a third-party async runtime.
- Rust doesn't let you use `.await` outside of `async` blocks or functions. Rust also doesn't have a
  built-in async runtime. You should use a third-party async runtime like `tokio` or `trpl`.
  
2. The async function below desugars into which type signature?
```rust
async fn calculate(nums: &[i32]) -> i32 {
  /* ... */
}
```
***Answer:***
```rust
fn calculate<'a>(nums: &'a [i32]) -> impl Future<Output = i32> + 'a {}
```
- An async function returns an anonymous type that implements the `Future` trait whose output is the
  function's return type. Here, that's an `impl Future<Output = i32>`. The future captures any
  lifetimes in the function's arguments. Therefore the returned type has the bound `+ 'a`, and the
  input slice has the type `&'a [i32]`. This indicates that the slice must live at least as long as
  the future which captures it.
