## Working With Any Number of Futures

When we switched from using two futures to three in the previous section, we also had to switch from
using `join` to using `join3`. This is really dumb. Fortunarely, there's a macro `join!` that
handles an arbitrary number of arguments and also handles awaiting the futures themselves (sweet)!
However, even this form only works when we know the number of futures ahead of time.

To check all the futures in some collection, we'll need to iterate over each and call `join` on all of
them. The `trpl::join_all` function does this and accepts any type which implements the `Iterator`
trait.

Change to the following in *hello-async/messaging.rs*:
```rust
        let futures = vec![tx_fut, tx1_fut, rx_fut];
        trpl::join_all(futures);
```
Now run and we get...
```
error[E0308]: mismatched types
  --> src/messaging.rs:40:36
   |
9  |           let tx_fut = async move {
   |  ______________________-
10 | |             let msgs = vec![
11 | |                 String::from("hi"),
12 | |                 String::from("from"),
...  |
19 | |             }
20 | |         };
   | |_________- the expected `async` block
...
28 |           let tx1_fut = async move {
   |  _______________________-
29 | |             let msgs = vec![
30 | |                 String::from("hello"),
31 | |                 String::from("from"),
...  |
37 | |             }
38 | |         };
   | |_________- the found `async` block
39 |           
40 |           let futures = vec![tx_fut, tx1_fut, rx_fut];
   |                                      ^^^^^^^ expected `async` block, found a different `async` block
   |
   = note: expected `async` block `{async block@src/messaging.rs:9:22: 20:10}`
              found `async` block `{async block@src/messaging.rs:28:23: 38:10}`

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0308`.
error: could not compile `hello-async` (bin "messaging") due to 1 previous error
```
- shit

None of the async blocks return anything, so each block produces a `Future<Output = ()>`. But,
`Future` is a trait, not a concrete type. The concrete types are the individual data structures
generated by the compiler for async blocks. You cannot put two different hand-written structs in a
`Vec`, and the same thing applies to the different structs generated by the compiler.

We need to use *trait objects* to make this work. Trait objects lets us treat each of the anonymous
futures produced by these types as the same type since all of them implement the `Future` trait.

Wrap each future in the `vec!` with `Box::new`, and then add the type annotation for `futures`
vector and include a `Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>`:
```rust
        let futures: Vec<Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>> = vec![
            Box::new(tx_fut), Box::new(tx1_fut), Box::new(rx_fut),
        ];
```
- The innermost type is the future itself. We note explicitly that the output of the future is the
  unit type `()` by writing `Future<Output = ()>`.
- Then we annotate the trait with `dyn` to mark it as dynamic.
- The entire trait reference is wrapped in a `Box`.
- Finally, we state explicitly that futures is a `Vec` containing these items.

Now when we run the compiler, we only have the errors mentioning `Unpin`. Notice how each error has a similar message:
```
error[E0277]: `dyn Future<Output = ()>` cannot be unpinned
   --> src/messaging.rs:43:24
    |
43  |         trpl::join_all(futures);
    |         -------------- ^^^^^^^ the trait `Unpin` is not implemented for `dyn Future<Output = ()>`, which is required by `Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>: Future`
    |         |
    |         required by a bound introduced by this call
    |
    = note: consider using the `pin!` macro
            consider using `Box::pin` if you need to access the pinned value outside of the current scope
    = note: required for `Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>` to implement `Future`
note: required by a bound in `join_all`
   --> /home/ipragmatic/.cargo/registry/src/index.crates.io-6f17d22bba15001f/futures-util-0.3.31/src/future/join_all.rs:105:14
    |
102 | pub fn join_all<I>(iter: I) -> JoinAll<I::Item>
    |        -------- required by a bound in this function
...
105 |     I::Item: Future,
    |              ^^^^^^ required by this bound in `join_all`

error[E0277]: `dyn Future<Output = ()>` cannot be unpinned
  --> src/messaging.rs:43:9
   |
43 |         trpl::join_all(futures);
   |         ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ the trait `Unpin` is not implemented for `dyn Future<Output = ()>`, which is required by `Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>: Future`
   |
   = note: consider using the `pin!` macro
           consider using `Box::pin` if you need to access the pinned value outside of the current scope
   = note: required for `Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>` to implement `Future`
note: required by a bound in `futures_util::future::join_all::JoinAll`
  --> /home/ipragmatic/.cargo/registry/src/index.crates.io-6f17d22bba15001f/futures-util-0.3.31/src/future/join_all.rs:29:8
   |
27 | pub struct JoinAll<F>
   |            ------- required by a bound in this struct
28 | where
29 |     F: Future,
   |        ^^^^^^ required by this bound in `JoinAll`

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0277`.
error: could not compile `hello-async` (bin "messaging") due to 2 previous errors
```
- The message tell us that the first async block (src/messaging.rs:43:24) doesn't implement the `Unpin` trait and suggests using `pin!` or `Box::pin` to resolve it (more on this later). So update the type annotation for `futures` by wrapping `Box` with `Pin`. Next use `Box::pin` on each future instead of `Box::new()`: 
```rust
        let futures: Vec<Pin<Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>>> =
            vec![Box::pin(tx_fut), Box::pin(tx1_fut), Box::pin(rx_fut)];
        trpl::join_all(futures).await;
```
- it works! sweet.

Using `Pin<Box<T>>` comes with a some extra overhead from putting these futures on the heap with
`Box`. We're only doing that to get the types to line up, but we don’t actually need the heap
allocation; after all, these futures are local to this particular function.

`Pin` is a wrapper type, so we can get the benefit of having a single type in the `Vec` (original
reason we used `Box`) without doing a heap allocation. Calling `std::pin::pin` macro uses `Pin`
directly with each future. But we still need to be explicit about the type of the pinned reference
(else Rust won't know how to interpret these as dynamic trait objects, which is what we need for
them to be in the `Vec`). So `pin!` each future when defined, and define futures as a `Vec`
containing pinned mutable references to the dynamic `Future` type:
```rust
        let tx_fut = pin!(async move {
            // --snip--
        });

        let rx_fut = pin!(async {
            // --snip--
        });

        let tx1_fut = pin!(async move {
            // --snip--
        });

        let futures: Vec<Pin<&mut dyn Future<Output = ()>>> =
            vec![tx1_fut, rx_fut, tx_fut];
```
- doing this lets the compiler kind of ignore that the program may have different output types.

`trpl::join!` lets us await futures of different types. But `trpl::join_all` doesn't, each future
must be the same type, which is what launched us on this `Pin` thing. This is a fundamental
tradeoff. We can either:

- deal with a dynamic number of futures with `join_all`, as long as they all have the same type.
- or we can deal with a set number of futures with the `join` functions or `join!`, even if they
  have different types.

It's like working with any other Rust types. Futures aren't special, even though we have some nice
syntax for working with them.

### Racing Futures

When joining futures with `join` family of functions and macros, we need all of them to finish
before moving on. But sometimes we only need some future from a set to finish before moving on. This
operation is called a `race`.

> Note: Under the hood, `race` is built on a more general function `select`, which you'll encounter
> more often in real-world Rust code. A `select` function can do a lot of things that `trpl::race`
> function can't, but it also has some additional complexity that we can skip over for now.

We'll use `trpl::race` to run two futures, `slow` and `fast`, against each other. Each one prints a
message when it starts running, pauses for some amount of time by calling and awaiting `sleep`, and
then prints another message when it finishes. Then we pass both to `trpl::race` and wait for one of
them to finish:
```rust
        let slow = async {
            println!("'slow' started.");
            trpl::sleep(Duration::from_millis(100)).await;
            println!("'slow' finished.");
        };

        let fast = async {
            println!("'fast' started.");
            trpl::sleep(Duration::from_millis(50)).await;
            println!("'fast' finished.");
        };

        trpl::race(slow, fast).await;
```

At each await point, Rust gives a runtime a chance to pause the task and switch to another if the
future being awaited isn't ready. The inverse is also true: Rust only pauses async blocks and hands
control back to a runtime at an await point. Everything between await points is synchronous.

That means if you do a bunch of work in an async block without an await point, that future will
block any other futures from making progress.
- You may sometimes hear this referred to as one future starving other futures.

If you have long-running blocking operations, async can be a useful tool for providing ways for
different parts of the program to relate to each other. But how would you hand control back to the
runtime in those cases?

### Yielding

Using the `yield_now` function, we can make prograss fast while still being able to hand back control to the runtime.

```rust
        let a = async {
            println!("'a' started.");
            slow("a", 30);
            trpl::yield_now().await;
            slow("a", 10);
            trpl::yield_now().await;
            slow("a", 20);
            trpl::yield_now().await;
            println!("'a' finished.");
        };

        let b = async {
            println!("'b' started.");
            slow("b", 75);
            trpl::yield_now().await;
            slow("b", 10);
            trpl::yield_now().await;
            slow("b", 15);
            trpl::yield_now().await;
            slow("b", 35);
            trpl::yield_now().await;
            println!("'b' finished.");
        };
```
- This is both clear about the actual intent and can be significantly faster than using `sleep`,
  because timers like the one used by `sleep` often have limits to how granular they can be.
  
async is useful even for compute-bound tasks (depending on what else the program does) b/c it
provides a useful tool for structuring the relationships between different parts of the program.
This is a form of *cooperative multitasking*, where each future has the power to determine when it
hands over control via await points. Each future also has the responsibility to avoid blocking for
too long.
- In some Rust-based embedded operating systems, this is the only kind of multitasking!
- The underlying dynamic is an important one to keep in mind if you are seeing a lot of work
  happening in serial that you expected to happen concurrently, though!

### Building Our Own Async Abstractions

New patterns can be created using futures. When done, the result is another building block that can
be used to build up further asunc abstractions.

Let's build a `timeout` function using async building blocks we already have. This is how we'd
expect to use it:
```rust
        let slow = async {
            trpl::sleep(Duration::from_millis(100)).await;
            "I finished!"
        };

        match timeout(slow, Duration::from_millis(10)).await {
            Ok(message) => println!("Succeeded with '{message}'"),
            Err(duration) => {
                println!("Failed after {} seconds", duration.as_secs())
            }
        }
```

Think about the API for `timeout`:
- It needs to be an async function so we can await it.
- Its first parameter should be a future to run. We can make it generic to allow it to work with any
  future.
- Its second parameter will be the maximum time to wait. If we use a `Duration`, that will make it
  easy to pass along to `trpl::sleep`.
- It should return a `Result`. If the future completes successfully, the `Result` will be `Ok` with
  the value produced by the future. If the timeout elapses first, the `Result` will be `Err` with
  the duration that the timeout waited for.
  
Now to think about `timeout`'s behavior:
- We want to race the future passed in against the duration.
  - use `trpl::sleep` to make a timer future from the duration, and use `trpl::race` to run that
    timer with the future the caller passes in.
- We know that `race` isn't fair and that it polls arguments in the order they are passed. So pass
  `future_to_try` to race first so it gets a chance to complete even if `max_time` is a very short.
  If `future_to_try` finishes first, `race` will return `Left` with the output from future. If timer
  finishes first, race will return `Right` with the timer’s output of `()`.
  - If the `future_to_try` succeeded and returns `Left(output)`, return `Ok(output)`. If the sleep
    timer elapsed instead and returns `Right(())`, ignore the `()` with `_` and return
    `Err(max_time)` instead.
    
```rust
async fn timeout<F: Future>(
    future_to_try: F,
    max_time: Duration,
) -> Result<F::Output, Duration> {
    match trpl::race(future_to_try, trpl::sleep(max_time)).await {
        Either::Left(out) => Ok(out),
        Either::Right(_) => Err(max_time),
    }
}
```
- With that, `timeout` is now working, and built out of two other async helpers.

Now let's change `main` in *num_futures.rs* and use it to implement `timeout` and show its output:
```rust
fn main() {
    trpl::run(async {
        let slow = async {
            trpl::sleep(Duration::from_secs(5)).await;
            "Finally finished"
        };

        match timeout(slow, Duration::from_secs(2)).await {
            Ok(message) => println!("Succeeded with '{message}'"),
            Err(duration) => {
                println!("Failed after {} seconds", duration.as_secs())
            }
        }
    });
}
```
```
Failed after 2 seconds
```

Because futures compose with other futures, really powerful tools can be built using smaller async
building blocks. e.g. this same approach can be used to combine timeouts with retries, and in turn,
we can use them with things like network calls.

In practice, you will usually work directly with `async` and `.await`, and secondarily with
functions/macros like `join`, `join_all`, `race`, etc. `pin` will only need to be used sometimes
alongside those APIs.

Here are a couple more things you might want to consider:
- We used a `Vec` with `join_all` to wait for all of the futures in some group to finish. How could
  you use a `Vec` to process a group of futures in sequence, instead? What are the tradeoffs of
  doing that?
- Take a look at the `futures::stream::FuturesUnordered` type from the `futures` crate. How would
  using it be different from using a `Vec`? (Don’t worry about the fact that it is from the `stream`
  part of the crate; it works just fine with any collection of futures.)
  
### Quiz

1. Given a function `sleep(d)` that sleeps for the given duration, consider this function:
    ```rust
    let futs: Vec<_> = [1, 2, 3].iter().map(|n| async {
        sleep(Duration::from_secs(5)).await;
        n + 1
    }).collect();

    for fut in futs {
        let n = fut.await;
        println!("{n}");
    }
    ```
    When executed, about how many seconds should this take to execute?
    
***Answer:*** 15
- Without using a function like `join_all`, the futures will not run concurrently. Therefore this
  code would take 15 seconds (5 seconds per list element).

---

2. Say you are designing a utility function with the following specification:
    > `map_stringify` takes two arguments: a vector of inputs, and an async function that converts
    > the input to an output, where the outputs can be converted to strings. `map_stringify` returns
    > a vector of stringified outputs.

    Which function type signature best encodes this specification?

***Answer:***
```rust
async fn map_stringify<I, O, F>(
    inputs: Vec<I>, f: impl Fn(I) -> F, 
) -> Vec<String>
where
    O: ToString,
    F: Future<Output = O>,
```
- the inputs all must be of the same type, which we consider `I` here. Now the async function `f`
  must implement the `Fn` trait and must accept a type `I`. Its output `F` is a future, which means
  it implements the trait `Future` with `Output` being a type `O`. Here's the catch, the output `O`
  must be able to convert to a string, which means it needs to have the trait `ToString`.
- Here's one implementation of the specified function:
    ```rust
    async fn map_stringify<I, O, F>(
        inputs: Vec<I>, f: impl Fn(I) -> F, 
    ) -> Vec<String>
    where
        O: ToString,
        F: Future<Output = O>,
    {
        let f = &f;
        let futs = inputs
            .into_iter()
            .map(|input| async move { f(input).await.to_string() });
        futures::future::join_all(futs).await
    }
    ```

---

3. Say you are writing a program that needs to run some async code, but every 500ms check to see if
   the computation should be halted. Which helper function would be most appropriate for
   accomplishing this task?

***Answer:*** `race / select`
- For instance, you could run a `select` in a loop between a long-running future and a sleep future
  that completes in 500ms.
