## Digging Into the Traits for Async

Throughout the chapter, we have used the `Future`, `Pin`, `Unpin`, `Stream`, and `StreamExt` traits
in various ways, but not understanding the details of how they work. There are times where you'll
hit situations where understanding these details matters.

### Future

Here is how Rust defines a `Future`:

```rust
use std::pin::Pin;
use std::task::{Context, Poll};

pub trait Future {
    type Output;

    fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
}
```

1. Future's associated type `Outpu` is what the future resolves to (like `Item` for `Iterator`).
2. `poll` takes a `Pin` reference for `self` and a mutable reference to a `Context` type. `poll`
   returns a `Poll<Self::Output>`.
   
The `Poll` type is a lot like an `Option`: The `Ready(T)` variant indicates the `Future` has
finished its work and that the `T` value is available. The `Pending` variant means that the future
still has work to do, so the caller needs to check again later:

```rust
enum Poll<T> {
    Ready(T),
    Pending
}
```

Under the hood, when callig `.await`, Rust compiles that to code which calls `poll`, kind of like
this (not exactly like this):

```rust
match hello("async").poll() {
    Ready(_) => {
        // We’re done!
    }
    Pending => {
        // But what goes here?
    }
}
```

So, a runtime **polls** each future it's responsible for, putting it back to sleep when it's not
ready.

### Pinning and the Pin and Unpin Traits

Here's that one pinning error we got a couple sections ago:
```
error[E0277]: `{async block@src/main.rs:8:23: 20:10}` cannot be unpinned
  --> src/main.rs:46:33
   |
46 |         trpl::join_all(futures).await;
   |                                 ^^^^^ the trait `Unpin` is not implemented for `{async block@src/main.rs:8:23: 20:10}`, which is required by `Box<{async block@src/main.rs:8:23: 20:10}>: std::future::Future`
   |
   = note: consider using the `pin!` macro
           consider using `Box::pin` if you need to access the pinned value outside of the current scope
   = note: required for `Box<{async block@src/main.rs:8:23: 20:10}>` to implement `std::future::Future`
note: required by a bound in `JoinAll`
  --> /Users/chris/.cargo/registry/src/index.crates.io-6f17d22bba15001f/futures-util-0.3.30/src/future/join_all.rs:29:8
   |
27 | pub struct JoinAll<F>
   |            ------- required by a bound in this struct
28 | where
29 |     F: Future,
   |        ^^^^^^ required by this bound in `JoinAll`

Some errors have detailed explanations: E0277, E0308.
For more information about an error, try `rustc --explain E0277`.
```

When read carefully, this error not only tells us that we need to pin the values but also why
pinning is required. The `trpl::join_all` function returns a struct called `JoinAll`. That struct in
turn is generic over a type `F`, which is constrained to implement the `Future` trait. Finally,
directly awaiting a `Future` requires that the future implements the `Unpin` trait.

Refer to the `poll` method's `self` type in the `Future` definition. When specifying the type of
`self` like this, we tell Rust what the type `self` must be to call the method (`poll` here). These
kinds of type annotations for `self` are like those for other function parameters, but with the
restriction that the type annotation has to be the type on which the method is implemented, or a
reference or smart pointer to that type, or a `Pin` wrapping a reference to that type.
- Know that if we want to `poll` a future (check whether it's `Pending` or `Ready(Output)`), we need
  a mutable reference to the type, which is wrapped in a `Pin`.
  
`Pin` is a wrapper type (kinda like `Box`, `Rc`, etc.) that also wraps other types. `Pin` only works
with types which implement the `Deref` or `DerefMut` traits (references and smart pointers). Note
`Pin` isn't a pointer itself, and it doesn't have any special behavior of its own (think the ref
counting of `Rc` or `Arc`). It's purely a tool the compiler can use to uphold the relevant
guarantees, by wrapping pointers in the type.

Recall `.await` is implemented in terms of calls to `poll`; this starts to explain the error message
from above. But that was in terms of `Unpin`, not `Pin`. So what exactly are `Pin` and `Unpin`, how
do they relate, and why does `Future` need `self` to be in a `Pin` type to call `poll`?

Refer back to when we wrote *hello-async.rs*. We described how a series of await points in a future
get compiled into a state machine, also noting how the compiler helps make sure the state machine
follows all of Rust's normal rules around safety (borrowing and ownership). To make that work, Rust
looks at what data is needed between each await point, the next await point, or the end of the async
block. It then creates a corresponding variant in the state machine created. Each variant gets the
access it needs to the data that'll be used in that section of the code, whether by taking ownership
of the data or by getting a mutable or immutable access to it.

When we want to move around the future that corresponds to that block things get trickier. When we
move a future, that actually means moving the state machine Rust created. And unlike most other
types in Rust, the futures Rust creates for async blocks can end up with references to themselves
(in the fields of any given variant). Any object which has a reference to itself is inherently
unsafe to move because references always point to the actual memory address of the thing they refer
to. If the data structure itself moves, then any references to it must be updated to avoid dangling
pointers.

In principle, the Rust compiler could try to update every reference to an object every time it gets
moved. That would likely incur a large performance overhead. But, if we can make sure the data
structure in question doesn't move in memory, then no references need updating. This is what the
borrow checker already guarantees: you can't move an item which has any active references to it
(*using safe code*).


`Pin` builds on top of this to give the exact guarantee we need. When pinning a value by wrapping a
pointer to it in `Pin`, it can't move. Thus, if you have `Pin<Box<SomeType>>`, you're actually
pinning the `SomeType` value, not the `Box`. The pinned box can move around freely. Remember: we
care about making sure the data ultimately being referenced stays in its place. If a pointer moves
around, but the data it points to is in the same place, then we're good.
- However, most types are safe to move around even when behind a `Pin` pointer. We only need to
  think about pinning when items have *internal references*. Primitive types like numbers and
  booleans don't have any internal strucutre like this, so they're safe to move.
- If we got a `Pin<Vec<String>>`, we need to do things vis `Pin`'s safe (but restrictive) APIs, even
  though `Vec<String>` is always safe to move (if no references to it). So, we need a way to tell
  the compiler that it's cool to move items around in these cases. Enter `Unpin`.

`Unpin` is a marker trait, like `Send` and `Sync`. Recall marker traits have no functionality of
their own; they exist only to tell the compiler it's safe to use a type which implements a certain
trait in a particular context. `Unpin` informs the compiler that a given type doesn't need to uphold
any guarantees about whether the value in question can be moved.
- Like `Send` and `Sync`, the compiler implements `Unpin` automatically for all types where it can
  prove it's safe. Implementing `Unpin` manually is unsafe b/c it requires manually upholding all
  the guarantees that make `Pin` and `Unpin` safe for a type with internal references.

So in the error from above, we originally tried to move the futures produced by an async block into
a `Vec<Box<dyn Future<Output = ()>>>`, but those futures may have internal references, so they don't
implement `Unpin`. They need to be pinned, and then we can pass the `Pin` type into the `Vec`,
confident that the underlying data in the futures will not be moved.

Pin and Unpin are mostly important for building lower-level libraries, or when you building a
runtime itself, not so much for day to day Rust code.

> Note: This combination of `Pin` and `Unpin` allows a whole class of complex types to be safe in
> Rust which are otherwise difficult to implement because they are self-referential. Types which
> require `Pin` show up most commonly in async Rust today, but you might (rarely) see it in other
> contexts, too.
>
> The specific mechanics for how `Pin` and `Unpin` work under the hood are covered extensively in
> the API documentation for `std::pin`, so if you would like to understand them more deeply, that is
> a great place to start.
> 
> If you want to understand how things work "under the hood" in even more detail, the official
> [Asynchronous Programming in Rust](https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/) book has you covered:
> - [Chapter 2: Under the Hood: Executing Futures and Tasks](https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/02_execution/01_chapter.html)
> - [Chapter 4: Pinning](https://rust-lang.github.io/async-book/04_pinning/01_chapter.html)

# The Stream Trait

Streams are like asynchronous iterators. Unlike `Iterator` and `Future`, there is no definition of a
`Stream` trait in the standard library (as of the time of writing), but there is a very common
definition used throughout the ecosystem. Kind of a a sequence of items which become ready over
time. We define a `Stream` trait which puts those features together

The `Stream` trait defines an associated type `Item` for the type of the items produced by the
stream. This is like `Iterator`: there may be zero to many of these, and unlike `Future`, where
there is always a single `Output` (even if it's the unit type `()`).
- `Iterator`, we have the idea of a sequence: its next method provides an `Option<Self::Item>`.
- `Future`, we have the idea of readiness over time: its `poll` method provides a
  `Poll<Self::Output>`.

```rust
use std::pin::Pin;
use std::task::{Context, Poll};

trait Stream {
    type Item;

    fn poll_next(
        self: Pin<&mut Self>,
        cx: &mut Context<'_>
    ) -> Poll<Option<Self::Item>>;
}
```

`Stream` also defines a method to get those items: `poll_next`. To make it clear that it polls like
`Future::poll` and produces a sequence of items like `Iterator::next`. Its return type combines
`Poll` with `Option`. The outer type is `Poll` (it has to be checked for readiness) just like a
future. The inner type is `Option` (to signal whether there are more messages) just like an
iterator.

In the example we saw in the section on streaming we didn't use `poll_next` or `Stream`, but instead
used `next` and `StreamExt`. We could work directly in terms of the `poll_next` API by hand-writing
our own `Stream` state machines (just as we could work with futures directly via their `poll`
method). Using `await` is much nicer though, so the `StreamExt` trait supplies the `next` method to
do just that.

```rust
trait StreamExt: Stream {
    async fn next(&mut self) -> Option<Self::Item>
    where
        Self: Unpin;

    // other methods...
}
```

The `StreamExt` trait is also the home of all the interesting methods available to use with streams.
`StreamExt` is automatically implemented for every type which implements `Stream`, but they are
separated out so that the community can iterate on the foundational trait distinctly from the
convenience APIs.

### Quiz
1. Given a future `f`, which of the following best describes how `f.await` works?

***Answer:*** It calls `f.poll()` in a loop, exiting if `f` is ready, or returning control to the
async runtime if `f` isn't ready.

- Rust uses a poll-based model for future execution. An await point desugars into a loop which
  repeatedly calls `.poll()`, and cedes control to the async runtime after each unsuccessful poll to
  allow other async code to run. The runtime can later "wake up" the `f.await` code to poll `f`
  again.

---

2. Imagine Rust did not require that futures were pinned in order to be polled. Which of the
   following async functions could potentially cause undefined behavior if not pinned?

***Answer:***
```rust
async fn example(x: i32) -> i32 {
    let y = &x;
    sleep(Duration::from_secs(1)).await;
    *y
}
```
- The core problem is addressed by pinning in self-reference, or a future which contains a pointer
  to itself. This happens when an async block contains a local variable that refers to another local
  variable in the future. Here, that would be `y = &x`.