# All the Places Patterns Can Be Used

## `match` Arms

Formally, `match` expressions are defined as the keyword `match`, a value to match on, and one or
more match arms that consist of a pattern and an expression to run if the value matches that arm's
pattern:

```
match VALUE {
    PATTERN => EXPRESSION,
    PATTERN => EXPRESSION,
    PATTERN => EXPRESSION,
}
```

`match` expressions must account for all possible values that value being matched on could be (must
be exhaustive). A way to accomplish this is by using a *catchall* pattern: `_`. `_` will match
anything but never binds a variable, so it's often used as the last match arm.

## Conditional `if let` Expressions

`if let` expressions serve as a way to write a one case `match`. Optionally, `if let` can also have
an `else` that'll run if the `if let` pattern doesn't match. Doing so gives more flexibility than a
`match` expression (can only express one value to compare with the patterns). Also, Rust doesn't
require that the conditions in a series of `if let`, `else if`, `else if let` arms relate to each
other.

Here's an example where we've created variables with hardcoded values that a real program might
receive from user input:

```rust
fn main() {
    let favorite_color: Option<&str> = None;
    let is_tuesday = false;
    let age: Result<u8, _> = "34".parse();

    if let Some(color) = favorite_color {
        println!("Using your favorite color, {color}, as the background");
    } else if is_tuesday {
        println!("Tuesday is green day!");
    } else if let Ok(age) = age {
        if age > 30 {
            println!("Using purple as the background color");  // this is what prints
        } else {
            println!("Using orange as the background color");
        }
    } else {
        println!("Using blue as the background color");
    }
}
```

The downside of using `if let` expressions is that the compiler doesn't check for exhaustiveness
like `match` expressions do. If the last `else` block were omitted, the compiler wouldn't alert us
to the potential logic bug.

## `while let` Conditional Loop

The `while let` conditional loop allows a `while` loop to run for as long as a pattern continues to
match:

```rust
fn main() {
    let mut stack = Vec::new();

    stack.push(1);
    stack.push(2);
    stack.push(3);

    while let Some(top) = stack.pop() {
        println!("{top}");
    }
}
```

```
3
2
1
```

## Function Parameters

Function parameters can also be patterns. We could match a tuple in a function's arguments to the
pattern. For example:

```rust
fn print_coordinates(&(x, y): &(i32, i32)) {
    println!("Current location: ({x}, {y})");
}

fn main() {
    let point = (3, 5);
    print_coordinates(&point);
}
```

- The values `&(3, 5)` match the pattern `&(x, y)`, so `x` is the value `3` and `y` is the value
  `5`.

Also know that patterns can be used in closure parameters just like those in function parameters.