## Processing a Series of Items with Iterators

### The `Iterator` Trait and the `next` Method

The `Iterator` trait:
```rust
pub trait Iterator {
    type Item;

    fn next(&mut self) -> Option<Self::Item>;

    // methods with default implementations elided
}
```
- this code says implementing the `Iterator` trait requires that you also define
  an `Item` type, and this `Item` type is used in the return type of the `next`
  method. In other words, the `Item` type will be the type returned from the
  iterator.
- the `Iterator` trait only requires implementors to define the `next` method.

Types of iterator constructors:
- `iter` produces an iterator over immutable references.
- `into_iter` takes ownership of the iterable and returns owned values.
- `iter_mut` produces an iterator over mutable references.

### Methods that Consume the `Iterator`

Methods that call `next` are called ***consuming adaptors***, because calling
them uses up the iterator.

- e.g. the method `sum`.

### Methods that Produce Other `Iterators`

***Iterator adaptors*** are methods defined on the `Iterator` trait that don’t
consume the iterator, and instead produce different iterators by changing the
original one.

- e.g. the method `map`, which takes a closure to call on each item as the items
  are iterated through. The `map` method returns a new iterator that produces
  the modified items.
  
### Using Closures that Capture Their Environment

Many iterator adapters take closures as arguments. Often, the closures we’ll
specify as arguments to the iterator adapters will be ones that capture their
environment.

- e.g. the `filter` method. The closure passed into it gets an item from the
  iterator it's called on and returns a `bool`. If the closure returns `true` on
  that item, the value will be included in the new iterator produced by
  `filter`. Otherwise (returns `false`), the value won’t be included.
  