## Comparing Performance: Loops vs. Iterators

Iterators get compiled down to roughly the same code as if you’d written the
lower-level code yourself. Iterators are one of Rust’s *zero-cost abstractions*,
which means using the abstraction imposes no additional runtime overhead. This
is how Bjarne Stroustrup defines zero-overhead in “Foundations of C++” (2012):

> In general, C++ implementations obey the zero-overhead principle: What you
> don’t use, you don’t pay for. And further: What you do use, you couldn’t hand
> code any better.

This code is from an audio decoder (which is shown in the book). The decoding algorithm uses the linear prediction mathematical operation to estimate future values based on a linear function of the previous samples. It uses an iterator chain to do some math on three following three variables:
- `buffer`, a slice of data
- `coefficients`, an array of 12 64-bit signed integers
- `qlp_shift`, an amount by which to shift data in.

```rust
let buffer: &mut [i32];
let coefficients: [i64; 12];
let qlp_shift: i16;

for i in 12..buffer.len() {
    let prediction = coefficients.iter()
                                 .zip(&buffer[i - 12..i])
                                 .map(|(&c, &s)| c * s as i64)
                                 .sum::<i64>() >> qlp_shift;
    let delta = buffer[i];
    buffer[i] = prediction as i32 + delta;
}
```

To calculate the value of `prediction`, the code iterates through each of the 12
values in `coefficients` and uses the `zip` method to pair the coefficient
values with the 12 prior values in `buffer`. Then, for each pair, we multiply
the values together, sum the results, and shift the bits in the sum `qlp_shift`
bits to the right.

The assembler code generated from the above code doesn't contain a loop
corresponding to the iteration over the values in coefficients: Rust knows that
there are 12 iterations, so it "unrolls" the loop.
- ***Unrolling*** is an optimization that removes the overhead of the loop
  controlling code and instead generates repetitive code for each iteration of
  the loop.

Afterwards, each coefficient gets stored in registers, meaning accessing the
values is really fast. There's also no bounds checks on the array at runtime.
These optimizations are what make Rust extremely efficient.
