## Using Threads to Run Code Simultaneously

In most current operating systems, an executed program's code is run in a `process`, and the
operating system will manage multiple processes at once. Likewise, within a program you can have
independent parts running simultaneously. The features that run these independent parts are called
*threads*.

Splitting computation in a program into multiple threads increases performance, but also add
complexity. B/c threads can run simultaneously, there's no inherent guaruntee about the order in
which the parts of the code in different threads run. Leading to problems like:
- Race conditions, where threads are accessing data or resources in an inconsistent order.
- Deadlocks, where two threads are waiting for each other, preventing both threads from continuing.
- Bugs that happen only in certain situations and are hard to reproduce and fix reliably.

Many operating systems provaide an API the language can call for creating new threads. Rust standard
library uses a 1:1 model of thread implementation where a program uses one operating system thread
per one language thread.
- there are crates that implement other models of threading that make tradeoffs to the 1:1 model
  (e.g. async).

### Creating a New Thread with spawn

To create new threads, call `thread::spawn` and pass it a closure containing the code to be run in
the new thread. For example:
```rust
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    thread::spawn(|| {
        for i in 0..10 {
            println!("Hello {} from spawned thread!");
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(1)):
        }
    });
    for i in 0..5 {
        println!("Hello {} from main thread!");
        thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(1));
    }
}
```
- the code in the spawned thread stops executing after the main thread of the program completes.
  Which is why the output of this program doesn't go to 9; the main thread only goes up to i = 4.
- calls to `thread::sleep` force a thread to stop executing for a specified duration, allowing other
  threads to run. The output of this program won't be the same each time since it depends on how the
  OS schedules threads. They'll likely take turns here, but that's not guarunteed.
  
### Waiting for All Threads to Finish Using join Handles

The previous code stops the thread prematurely, but also doesn't guarantee the order in which
threads are run, it also might not run at all. These problems can be addressed by saving the return
value of `thread::spawn` in a variable. Its return type is `JoinHandle`, which is an owned value
that, when we call the `join` on it, will wait for its thread to finish.
```rust
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
        for i in 1..10 {
            println!("hi number {i} from the spawned thread!");
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(1));
        }
    });

    for i in 1..5 {
        println!("hi number {i} from the main thread!");
        thread::sleep(Duration::from_millis(1));
    }

    handle.join().unwrap();
}
```
- Calling `join` on handle blocks the thread currently running until the thread represented by the
  handle terminates.
  - *Blocking a thread* means that thread is prevented from performing work or exiting.
- placement of the `join` call on a handle matters as it can affect whether or not the threads run
  at the same time. For example, if we moved `handle.join().unwrap()` to before the main thread
  `for` loop, then the main thread would wait for the spawned thread to finish running before
  running itself.
  
### Using move Closures with Threads

It's common to use `move` with closures passed to `thread::spawn`. This is so the closure takes
ownership of the values it uses from the envrionment, transferring ownership of the values between
threads.
- To use data from a main thread in a spawned thread, the spawned thread's closure must capture the
  values it needs.

#### Describe Problems
```rust
use std::thread;

fn main() {
    let v = vec![1, 2, 3];

    let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
        println!("Here's a vector: {v:?}");
    });

    handle.join().unwrap();
}
```
- Rust infers how to capture `v`, and because `println!` only requires an immutable reference to
  `v`, the closure tries to borrow `v`. The issue is that Rust can't tell how long the spawned
  thread will run, so it doesn't know if the reference to `v` will always be valid.

```rust
use std::thread;

fn main() {
    let v = vec![1, 2, 3];

    let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
        println!("Here's a vector: {v:?}");
    });

    drop(v); // oh no!

    handle.join().unwrap();
}
```
- Here there's a possibility the spawned thread would be put in the background without running at
  all. The spawned thread has a reference to `v` inside, but the main thread immediately drops `v`
  (using `drop`). Now `v` is no longer valid once the spawned thread starts to execute, so a
  reference to it is invalid.

Solution:
```rust
use std::thread;

fn main() {
    let v = vec![1, 2, 3];

    let handle = thread::spawn(move || {
        println!("Here's a vector: {v:?}");
    });

    handle.join().unwrap();
}
```
- we call `move` alongside the closure so that `v` is moved into its environment.

### Quiz

1. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of
   the program if it were executed.
```rust
use std::thread;
fn main() {
    let mut n = 1;
    let t = thread::spawn(move || {
        n = n + 1;
        thread::spawn(move || {
            n = n + 1;
        })
    });
    n = n + 1;
    t.join().unwrap().join().unwrap();
    println!("{n}");
}
```
***Answer:*** `2`
- The `move` keyword causes `n` to be copied into the closure, so the assignments `n = n + 1` within
  `thread::spawn` have no effect on the outer `n`.
  
2. onsider this example from the text where a vector is improperly captured by a thread:
```rust
use std::thread;
fn main() {
    let v = vec![1, 2, 3];
    let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
        println!("Here's a vector: {:?}", v);
    });
    handle.join().unwrap();
}
```
The Rust compiler includes this diagnostic:
```
note: function requires argument type to outlive `'static`
 --> src/main.rs:6:18
  |
6 |       let handle = thread::spawn(|| {
  |  __________________^
7 | |         println!("Here's a vector: {:?}", v);
8 | |     });
  | |______^
```
Recall that `'static` is the lifetime of references that are valid for the entire program's duration.

***Answer:*** Rust doesn't know how long a thread will run, so the thread's captures must live
forever
- If a closure captures a reference to a value that lived less than `'static`, it's possible that
  the thread would live longer than the value and violate memory safety. Note that
  [thread::scope](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/thread/fn.scope.html) can be used to allow threads
  to capture non-static references by statically limiting the lifetime of the thread.
 