## Using Message Passing to Transfer Data Between Threads

One increasingly popular approach to ensuring safe concurrency is *message passing*, where threads
or actors communicate by sending each other messages containing data. Here's the idea in a slogan
from the Go programming language docs:
- "Do not communicate by sharing memory; instead, share memory by communicating."

To accomplish message-sending concurrency, Rust's standard library provides an implementation of
*channels*. A *channel* is a general concept by which data is sent from one thread to another. A
channel has two halves: a *transmitter* and *receiver*.
- the ***transmitter*** is the "upstream" location where data is placed into the *channel* to be
  sent.
- the ***receiver*** is the "downstream" location where the data ends up.

In your code, one part calls methods on the transmitter with the data to be sent, and the other
parts checks the receiver for arriving messages. The given channel is said to be closed if either
the transmitter or receiver is dropped.
- Channels can be used for any threads that need to communicate between each other. e.g. a chat
  system or a system where many threads perform parts of a calculation and send the parts to one
  thread that aggregates the results.

Make a program that has one thread to generate values and send them down a channel, and another
thread to receive values and print them.

```rust
use std::sync::mpsc;

fn main() {
    let (tx, rx) = mpsc::channel();
}
```
- `mpsc` stands for *multiple producer, single consumer*. The way Rust's standard library implements
  channels means it can have multiple sending ends that produce values but only one receiving end
  that consumes those values.
- `mpsc::channel` creates a new channel. It returns a tuple, where the first element is the sending
  end (the transmitter `tx`) and the second element is the receiving end (the receiver `rx`).
  
Move the transmitting end into a spawned thread and have it send one string so the spawned thread is
communicating with the main thread:
```rust
use std::sync::mpsc;
use std::thread;

fn main() {
    let (tx, rx) = mpsc::channel();

    thread::spawn(move || {
        let val == String::from("hi");
        tx.send(val).unwrap();
    })
    let received = rx.recv().unwrap();
    println!("{received}");
}
```
- `move` moves ownership of `tx` into the spawned thread. Which is necessary for the spawned thread
  to be able to send messages through the channel.
- `tx` has the `send` method which takes in the value to send and returns a `Result<T, E>` type. So
  if the receiver has already been dropped and there's nowhere to send a value, `send` will return
  an error.
- `recv` blocks the main thread's execution and waits for a value on a receiver (`rx` in our case),
  returning an error if the corresponding channel has hung up. It returns a `Result<T, E>` like
  `send`. 

The receiver also has the method `try_recv` which doesn't block, but instead returns `Result<T, E>`
instantly: a message held in an `Ok` if one is available, and an `Err` if there aren't any messages. 
- `try_recv` is useful if the thread has other work to do while waiting for messages. e.g. could
  write a loop that calls `try_recv` every so often, handles a message if one is available, and
  otherwise does other work for a bit until checking again.

### Channels and Ownership Transference

If the program tried to use `val` in the spawned thread after sending it down the channel, it would
cause a compile-time error. The reason this happens is b/c the call `tx.send(val)` moves `val` out
of the spawned thread and into a receiver. Meaning the receiver now owns the data in `val`. Any
attempt to use `val` after sending in the spawned thread fails. Thank you ownership system!

### Sending Multiple Values and Seeing the Receiver Waiting

Make modifications that'll prove the prior code is running concurrently by sending multiple messages
and pausing for a second between each.
```rust
use std::sync::mpsc;
use std::thread;
use std::time::Duration;

fn main() {
    let (tx, rx) = mpsc::channel();

    thread::spawn(move || {
        let vals = vec![
            String::from("hi"),
            String::from("from"),
            String::from("the"),
            String::from("thread"),
        ];

        for val in vals {
            tx.send(val).unwrap();
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_secs(1));
        }
    });

    for received in rx {
        println!("Got: {received}");
    }
}
```
- The main thread isn't explicitly calling `recv` anymore, instead treating `rx` as an iterator. For
  each value received, print it. When the channel is closed, it'll stop iterating.
- The spawned thread has direction to send messages every second. The main thread `for` loop doesn't
  have any code for delays, so it's evident that the main thread is receiving values from the
  spawned thread, thus proving concurrent code.

### Creating Multiple Producers by Cloning the Transmitter

Put `mpsc` to use and expand the code to now create multiple threads that send values to the same
receiver. Do so by cloning the transmitter:
```rust
use std::sync::mpsc;
use std::time::Duration;
use std::thread;

fn main() {
    let (tx, rx) = mpsc::channel();
    let tx1 = tx.clone();

    thread::spawn(move || {
        let vals = vec![
            String::from("hi"),
            String::from("from"),
            String::from("spawned"),
            String::from("thread"),
            String::from("tx"),
        ];
        for val in vals {
            tx.send(val).unwrap();
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_secs(1));
        }
    });

    thread::spawn(move || {
        let vals = vec![
            String::from("hello"),
            String::from("it's"),
            String::from("tx1"),
        ];
        for val in vals {
            tx1.send(val).unwrap();
            thread::sleep(Duration::from_secs(1));
        }
    });

    for received in rx {
        println!("Got: {}", received);
    }
}
```
- now the transmitter is cloned before spawning a thread, giving a new transmitter that can be
  passed to another spawned thread. So there's two different threads, each sending different
  messages to the receiver `rx`.
- the output from running the code could be in a different order depending on the hardware running
  it.

### Quiz
1. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of
   the program if it were executed.
```rust
use std::{sync::mpsc, thread};

enum ClientMessage { Incr, Get, Quit }
enum ServerMessage { Get(usize) }

fn main() {
    let (server_tx, client_rx) = mpsc::channel();
    let (client_tx, server_rx) = mpsc::channel();
    let server = thread::spawn(move || {
        let mut n = 0;
        loop {
            match server_rx.recv().unwrap() {
                ClientMessage::Quit => break,
                ClientMessage::Incr => n += 1,
                ClientMessage::Get => server_tx.send(ServerMessage::Get(n)).unwrap()
            }
        }
    });
    for msg in [ClientMessage::Incr, ClientMessage::Get, ClientMessage::Quit] {
        client_tx.send(msg).unwrap();
    }
    if let ServerMessage::Get(n) = client_rx.recv().unwrap() {
        println!("{}", n)
    }
    server.join().unwrap();
}
```
***Answer:*** `1`
- This is an example of how to use enums to send different kinds of messages over a channel. Here,
  the client increments a number, retrieves the number, then exits the server.
- In the spawned thread (`server`), the program starts a `loop` that listens and matches the type of
  message sent. In the main thread, the client sends directions to the server to increment, get
  message, and then quit. Also, there's a listener for the client receiver to detect the get server
  message and to print the value it receives. The main thread waits for the `server` thread to
  finish before running.
  
2. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of
   the program if it were executed.
```rust
use std::{sync::mpsc, thread};
fn main() {
    let (tx, rx) = mpsc::channel();
    thread::spawn(move || {
        let s = String::from("Hello world");
        tx.send(s.clone()).unwrap();
        tx.send(s.len()).unwrap();
    });
    let s = rx.recv().unwrap();
    let n = rx.recv().unwrap();
    println!("{s} {n}");
}
```
***Answer:*** Doesn't compile
- Channels can only send values of the same type. So `tx.send(s.len())` is a type error since the
  previous message sent was a `String`. To send values of multiple types, use either an enum or the
  [Any](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/any/trait.Any.html) trait.
