## Extensible Concurrency with the Sync and Send Traits

Rust has very few concurrency features built into the language. The ones we've discussed so far are
part of the standard library, not the language. That said, there are two concurrency concepts
embedded in the language: the `std::marker` traits `Sync` and `Send`.

### Allowing Transference of Ownership Between Threads with Send

The `Send` trait indicates that ownership of values of the type implementing `Send` can be
transferred between threads.
- Almost every type is `Send`, but there are some exception like `Rc<T>`: this can't be `Send` b/c
  if you cloned an `Rc<T>` and tried to transfer ownership of it to another thread, both threads
      could update the reference count at the same time. For that reason, `Rc<T>` only works in
      single-threaded situations.
- Any type composed entirely of `Send` types is automatically marked as `Send` as well. Almost all
  primitive types are `Send`, except raw pointers.
  
### Allowing Access from Multiple Threads with Sync

The `Sync` trait indicates that it's safe for types implementing `Sync` to be referenced across
different threads.
- Any type `T` is `Sync` if `&T` is `Send`, meaning the reference can be safely sent to another
  thread.
- Similar to `Send`, primitive types are `Sync`, and types entirely composed of `Sync` types are
  also `Sync`.

`Sync` is the most similar concept in Rust to the colloquial meaning of the phrase "thread-safe", as
in a particular piece of data can be safely used by multiple concurrent threads. The reason for
having separate Send and Sync traits is that a type can sometimes be one, or both, or neither. For
example:
- Smart pointer `Rc<T>` is neither `Send` nor `Sync`.
- `RefCell<T>` and the family of related `Cell<T>` types are `Send` (`T: Send`) but not `Sync`. A
  `RefCell` can be sent across a thread boundary, but can't be accessed concurrently because the
  implementation of borrow checking that `RefCell<T>` does at runtime is not thread-safe.
- `Mutex<T>` is `Send` and `Sync`. It can be used to share access with multiple threads.
- The `MutexGuard<'a, T>` returned by `Mutex::lock` is `Sync` (`T: Sync`) but not `Send`. It's
  specifically not `Send` because some platforms mandate that mutexes are unlocked by the same
  thread that locked them.
  
### Implementing Send and Sync Manually Is Unsafe

Because types made up of `Send` and `Sync` traits are automatically `Send` and `Sync`, we don't have
to implement those traits manually. As marker traits, they don't have any methods to implement.
They're just useful for enforcing invariants related to concurrency.
- Manually implementing these traits involves implementing unsafe Rust code. For now, the important
  thing is that building new concurrent types not made up of `Send` and `Sync` parts requires
  careful thought to uphold the safety guarantees.
  ["The Rustonomicon"](https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/index.html) has more information about
  these guarantees and how to uphold them.
  
### Summary

Because very little of how Rust handles concurrency is part of the language, many concurrency
solutions are implemented as crates. These evolve more quickly than the standard library, so be sure
to search online for the current, state-of-the-art crates to use in multithreaded situations.

The Rust standard library provides channels for message passing and smart pointer types, like
`Mutex<T>` and `Arc<T>`, that're safe to use in concurrent contexts. The type system and the borrow
checker ensure that code using these solutions won't end up with data races or invalid references.
Once you get your code to compile, you can rest assured that it'll happily run on multiple threads
without the kinds of hard-to-track-down bugs common in other languages.

### Quiz
1. Imagine you are designing an API for a database connection like this:
```rust
struct DbConnection { /* ... */ }
impl DbConnection {
    fn query(&self) -> DbResult {
        /* ... */
    }
}
```
Your database does not support concurrent queries from the same connection. Which of the following
marker traits should `DbConnection` implement?
***Answer:*** `Send`
- It's fine to send a `DbConnection` between threads, so `DbConnection` should implement `Send`. But
  it wouldn't be valid e.g. for an `Arc<Database>` to be shared such that multiple threads can
  concurrently call `db.query()`, so `DbConnection` shouldn't implement `Sync`.