## Traits: Defining Shared Behavior

A ***trait*** defines functionality that a particular type has and can share with other types. We can use traits to define shared behavior in an abstract way, and can use trait bounds to specify that a generic type can be any type that has certain behavior.
- Traits are similar to a feature called *interfaces* in other languages

### Defining a Trait
Different types can share the same behavior if we can call the same methods on all of those types. Trait definitions are a way to group method signatures together to define a set of behaviors necessary to accomplish some purpose.

As an example, we want to make a media aggregator library named `aggregator` that can display summaries of data that might be stored in a `NewsArticle` or `Tweet` instance. To do this, we need a summary from each type, and we’ll request that summary by calling a summarize method on an instance:
```rust
pub trait Summary {
	fn summarize(&self) -> String;
}
```
- After the method signature we use a semicolon instead of `{}`. Each type implementing this trait must provide its own custom behavior for the body of the method. The compiler will enforce that any type that has the `Summary` trait will have the method `summarize` defined with this signature exactly.

### Implementing a Type on a Trait
Now that we’ve defined the desired signatures for the `Summary` trait’s methods, we can implement it on the types in our media aggregator. The `Summary` trait on the `NewsArticle` struct uses a headline, author, and location to create the return value of `summarize`. The `Tweet` struct defines `summarize` as the username followed by the text of the tweet, assuming that tweet content is already limited to 280 characters:
```rust
pub struct NewsArticle {
	pub headline: String,
	pub location: String,
	pub author: String,
	pub content: String,
}

impl Summary for NewsArticle {
	fn summarize(&self) -> String {
		format!{"{}, by {} ({})", self.headline, self.author, self.location}
	}
}

pub struct Tweet {
	pub username: String,
	pub content: String,
	pub reply: bool,
	pub retweet: bool,
}

impl Summary for Tweet {
	fn summarize(&self) -> String {
		format!{"{}: {}", self.username, self.content}
	}
}
```

Now that the library has implemented the `Summary` trait on `NewsArticle` and `Tweet`, users of the crate can call the trait's methods on instances of `NewsArticle` and `Tweet` in the same way we call regular methods. The only difference is that the user must bring the trait into scope as well as the types. This could be how a binary crate could use the `aggregator` library crate:
```rust
fn main() {
    let tweet = Tweet {
        username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
        content: String::from(
            "of course, as you probably already know, people",
        ),
        reply: false,
        retweet: false,
    };

    println!("1 new tweet: {}", tweet.summarize());
}
```
Other crates that depend on the `aggregator` crate can also bring the `Summary` trait into scope to implement it on their own types. One restriction is that we can implement a trait on a type only if at least one of the traits or types is local to our crate. For example, we can implement standard library traits like `Display` on a custom type like `Tweet` as part of our `aggregator` crate functionality, because the type `Tweet` is local to our `aggregator` crate. But we can’t implement external traits on external types. For example, we can’t implement the `Display` trait on `Vec<T>` within our `aggregator` crate, because `Display` and `Vec<T>` are both defined in the standard library and aren’t local to our `aggregator` crate.

This restriction is part of a property called ***coherence***, more specifically the *orphan rule*, named because the parent type is not present. This rule ensures that other people’s code can’t break your code and vice versa. Without the rule, two crates could implement the same trait for the same type, and Rust wouldn’t know which implementation to use.

### Default Implementations
It’s useful to have default behavior for some (or all) methods in a trait instead of requiring implementations for all methods on each type. So as we implement the trait on a particular type, we can keep or override each method’s default behavior.

Specify a default string for the `summarize` method of the `Summary` trait instead of only defining the method signature, and then to use a default implementation to summarize instances of `NewsArticle`, for example, specify an empty `impl` block with `impl Summary for NewsArticle {}`.
```rust
pub trait Summary {
	fn summarize(&self) -> String {
		String::from("(Read more...)")
	}
}

impl Summary for NewsArticle {}
```

Despite no longer defining the `summarize` method on `NewsArticle` directly, we’ve provided a default implementation and specified that `NewsArticle` implements the `Summary` trait. As a result, we can still call the `summarize` method on an instance of `NewsArticle`, like so:
```rust
use aggregator::{self, NewsArticle, Summary};

fn main() {
    let article = NewsArticle {
        headline: String::from("Penguins win the Stanley Cup Championship!"),
        location: String::from("Pittsburgh, PA, USA"),
        author: String::from("Iceburgh"),
        content: String::from(
            "The Pittsburgh Penguins once again are the best \
             hockey team in the NHL.",
        ),
    };

    println!("New article available! {}", article.summarize()); // this prints 'New article available! (Read more...)'
}
```
- creating a default implementation doesn’t require us to change anything about the implementation of `Summary` on `Tweet` the syntax for overriding a default implementation is the same as the syntax for implementing a trait method that DOESN’T have a default implementation

Default implementations can call its sibling methods within its parent trait, even if the other methods don’t have default implementations. In this way, traits can provide a lot of useful functionality and only require implementors to specify a small part of it. For example:
```rust
pub trait Summary {
	fn summarize_author(&self) -> String;

	fn summarize(&self) -> String {
		format!("(Read more from {}...)", self.summarize_author())
	}
}
```
and then to use the above version of `Summary`, we only need to implement `summarize_author` when implementing the trait on a type:
```rust
impl Summary for Tweet {
	fn summarize_author(&self) -> {
		format!("@{}", self.username)
	}
}
```
after defining `summarize_author`, we can call `summarize` on instances of the `Tweet` struct. Where the default implementation of `summarize` will call `summarize_author`. Because we’ve implemented `summarize_author`, the `Summary` trait has given us the behavior of the `summarize` method without requiring us to write any more code. Example code in `main`:
```rust
use aggregator::{self, Summary, Tweet};

fn main() {
	let tweet = Tweet {
		username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
        content: String::from(
            "of course, as you probably already know, people",
        ),
        reply: false,
        retweet: false,
	};
	 println!("1 new tweet: {}", tweet.summarize()); // prints to console '1 new tweet: (Read more from @horse_ebooks...)'
}
```
- note that it's not possible to call the default implementation from an overriding implementation of that same method

### Quiz 1:
1. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of the program if it were executed.
```rust
trait MakeNoise {
  fn make_noise(&self) {
    println!("(silence)");
  }
}

struct Dog {}
struct Cat {}

impl MakeNoise for Dog {
  fn make_noise(&self) {
    println!("bark");
  }
}

impl MakeNoise for Cat {}

fn main() {
  let dog = Dog {};
  let cat = Cat {};
  dog.make_noise();
  cat.make_noise();
}
```
#### Answer:
This program does compile. The output of this program will be:
```
bark
(silence)
```
The implementation of `MakeNoise` provides a specific implementation for `Dog` and uses the default implementation for `Cat`. Therefore calling `make_noise` on each prints `bark` and `(silence)`, respectively.

2. The following are statements about what kinds of trait implementations are permitted by Rust. Select each statement which is true.
#### Answer:
```markdown
✅ CORRECT:
- You can implement a local trait for a local type
- You can implement a local trait for an external type
- You can implement an external trait for a local type
```
The "orphan rule" requires that you cannot implement an external trait for an external type, this is to ensure code doesn't break if two crates provide conflicting implementations.

### Traits as Parameters
Traits can be used to define functions that accept many different types. Use the `Summary` trait implemented on `NewsArticle` and `Tweet` to define a `notify` function that calls the `summarize` method on its `item` parameter, which is of some type that implements the `Summary` trait. We do this using `impl Trait` syntax:
```rust
pub fn notify(item: &impl Summary) {
	println!("Breaking news! {}", item.summarize());
}
```
- `&impl Summary` for the `item` parameter means that it ONLY accepts types that implement the `Summary` trait, and as such, from the body of `notify` we can call any methods `Summary` contains 

#### Trait Bound Syntax
The `impl Trait` syntax is actually syntax sugar ***trait bounds***. We place trait bounds with the declaration of the generic type parameter after a colon and inside angle brackets:
```rust
pub fn notify<T: Summary>(item: &T) {
	println!("Breaking news! {}", item.summarize());
}
```

`impl Trait` syntax is convenient and more concise in simple cases, whereas using trait bound syntax could add unnecesary verbosity for simple cases. That said, trait bound syntax is the better option for expressing more "complex" constraints and would be less verbose than `impl Trait` syntax. For example, for multiple parameters:
```rust
// impl Trait syntax
pub fn notify(item1: &impl Summary, item2: &impl Summary) {

// trait bound syntax
pub fn notify<T: Summary>(item1: &T, item2: &T) {
```

#### Specifying Multiple Trait Bounds with the + Syntax
We can also specify multiple trait bounds. For example, if we wanted `notify` to use display formatting and `summarize` on an `item`. We would specify in `notify` definition that `item` must implement `Display` and `Summary` using the `+` syntax:
```rust
// imple Trait syntax
pub fn notify(item: &(impl Summary + Display)) {

// trait bound syntax
pub fn notify<T: Summary + Display>(item: &T) {
```

#### Clearer Trait Bounds with `where` Clauses
For sake of readability when it comes to many trait bounds, Rust has alternate syntax for specifying trait bounds inside a `where` clause after the function signature. So instead of writing this:
```rust
fn some_function<T: Display + Clone, U: Clone + Debug>(t: &T, u: &U) -> i32 {
```
we can write:
```rust
fn some_function<T, U>(t: &T, u: &U) -> i32
where
	T: Display + Clone,
	U: Clone + Debug,
{
```
see, less cluttered.

### Returning Types that Implement Traits
We can also use the `impl Trait` syntax in the return position to return a value of some type that implements a trait:
```rust
fn returns_summarizable() -> impl Summary {
	Tweet {
		username: String::from("horse_ebooks"),
		content: String::from(
			"of course, as you probably already know, people"
		),
		reply: false,
		retweet: false,
	}
}
```
- by using `impl Summary` for the return type, we specify that `returns_summarizable` returns some type that implements the `Summary` trait without naming the concrete type. In this case, `returns_summarizable` returns a `Tweet`, but the code calling this function doesn’t need to know that.

The ability to specify a return type by the trait it implements is useful in the context of closures and iterators. Closures and iterators create types that only the compiler know, or types that are very long to specify. The `impl Trait` syntax lets you concisely specify that a function returns a type that implements the `Iterator` trait without needing to write out a very long type.
- however, you can only use `impl Trait` if you’re returning a single type. A function that returns different types but specifies that the return type implements a particular trait wouldn't compile

### Using Trait Bounds to Conditionally Implement Methods
By using a trait bound with an `impl` block that uses generic type parameters, we can implement methods conditionally for types that implement the specified traits. For example, the type Pair<T> in the code below always implements the `new` function to return a new instance of `Pair<T>`. But in the next `impl` block, `Pair<T>` only implements the `cmp_display` method if its inner type `T` implements the `PartialOrd` (enables comparison) *and* the `Display` trait (enables printing):
```rust
use std::fmt::Display;

struct Pair<T> {
    x: T,
    y: T,
}

impl<T> Pair<T> {
    fn new(x: T, y: T) -> Self {
        Self { x, y }
    }
}

impl<T: Display + PartialOrd> Pair<T> {
    fn cmp_display(&self) {
        if self.x >= self.y {
            println!("The largest member is x = {}", self.x);
        } else {
            println!("The largest member is y = {}", self.y);
        }
    }
}
```

We can also conditionally implement a trait for any type that implements another trait. Implementations of a trait on any type that satisfies the trait bounds are called ***blanket implementations*** and are extensively used standard library. For example, the standard library implements the `ToString` trait on any type that implements the `Display` trait:
```rust
impl<T: Display> ToString for T {
	// code looks something like this
}
```
- blanket implementations appear in the documentation for the trait in the “Implementors” section.

Traits and trait bounds let us write code that uses generic type parameters to reduce duplication but also specify to the compiler that we want the generic type to have particular behavior. The compiler can then use the trait bound information to check that all the concrete types used with our code provide the correct behavior. In dynamically typed languages, we would get an error at runtime if we called a method on a type which didn’t define the method. But Rust moves these errors to compile time so we’re forced to fix the problems before our code is even able to run. Additionally, we don’t have to write code that checks for behavior at runtime because we’ve already checked at compile time. Doing so improves performance without having to give up the flexibility of generics.

### Quiz 2
1. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of the program if it were executed.
```rust
use std::fmt::Display;

fn displayable<T: Display>(t: T) -> impl Display { t }

fn main() {
  let s = String::from("hello");
  let mut s2 = displayable(s);
  s2.push_str(" world");
  println!("{s2}");
}
```
#### Answer:
This program does not compile. Because `displayable` returns `impl Display`, then we only know that `s2` is some type that implements `Display`, not that it is a `String` which has a `push_str` method. Therefore we cannot call `s2.push_str(..)`. If the return type of `displayable` was `-> T`, then this program would compile.

2. What is the smallest set of trait bounds on T needed to make this function type-check?
```rust
fn f<T: /* ??? */>(t: &T) {
  let t2 = t.clone();
  println!("{t2}");
}
```
#### Answer:
`Clone + Display`. Because `clone` is called and the `{}` display brackets are used in a formatter, then `T` must be `Clone` and `Display`.
