## Validating References with Lifetimes

### Preventing Dangling References with Lifetimes

The main aim of lifetimes is to prevent *dangling references*, which cause a program to reference data other than the data it’s intended to reference. The following code contains annotations showing the lifetimes of variables:

```rust
fn main() {
    let r;                // ---------+-- 'a
                          //          |
    {                     //          |
        let x = 5;        // -+-- 'b  |
        r = &x;           //  |       |
    }                     // -+       |
                          //          |
    println!("r: {}", r); //          |
}                         // ---------+
```
<p style="font-size:.8em; font-weight:600">Listing 10-16</p>

> Note: The examples in Listings 10-16, 10-17, and 10-23 declare variables without giving them an initial value, so the variable name exists in the outer scope. This might appear to be in conflict with Rust’s having no null values. However, if we try to use a variable before giving it a value, we’ll get a compile-time error, which shows that it doesn't allow null values.

- this code won't compile because `println!("r: {r}")` isn't valid. this is because at that line of code, `r` isn't assigned any data. The line `r = &x` went out of scope after the `{}`, so it deallocated `&x` as `r`'s value.

### The Borrow Checker Ensures Data Outlives Its References
The borrow checker will compare scopes to determine whether all borrows are valid. Refer to the code above. The lifetime of `r` is annotated with `'a` and that of `b` is `'b`. At compile time, Rust compares the size of the two lifetimes and sees that `r` has a lifetime of `'a` but that it refers to memory with a lifetime of `'b`. The program is rejected because `'b` is shorter than `'a`: the subject of the reference doesn’t live as long as the reference.

Listing 10-17 fixes the error in listing 10-16:
```rust
fn main() {
    let x = 5;            // ----------+-- 'b
                          //           |
    let r = &x;           // --+-- 'a  |
                          //   |       |
    println!("r: {}", r); //   |       |
                          // --+       |
}                         // ----------+
```
<p style="font-size:.8em; font-weight:600">Listing 10-17</p>

- Here, `x` has the lifetime `'b`, which in this case is larger than `'a`. This means `r` can reference `x` because Rust knows that the reference in `r` will always be valid while `x` is valid.

### Generic Lifetimes in Functions
We’ll write a `longest` function that returns the longer of two string slices. This function will take two string slices and return a single string slice:
```rust
fn main() {
    let string1 = String::from("abcd");
    let string2 = "xyz";

    let result = longest(string1.as_str(), string2);
    println!("The longest string is {}", result);     // prints "The longest string is abcd"
}
```
<p style="font-size:.8em; font-weight:600">Listing 10-18</p>

If we try to implement the `longest` function as shown in Listing 10-19, it won’t compile because we'd get an error talking about lifetimes:
```rust
fn longest(x: &str, y: &str) -> &str {
    if x.len() > y.len() {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
```
<p style="font-size:.8em; font-weight:600">Listing 10-19</p>

```
$ cargo run
   Compiling chapter10 v0.1.0 (file:///projects/chapter10)
error[E0106]: missing lifetime specifier
 --> src/main.rs:9:33
  |
9 | fn longest(x: &str, y: &str) -> &str {
  |               ----     ----     ^ expected named lifetime parameter
  |
  = help: this function's return type contains a borrowed value, but the signature does not say whether it is borrowed from `x` or `y`
help: consider introducing a named lifetime parameter
  |
9 | fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &'a str) -> &'a str {
  |           ++++     ++          ++          ++

For more information about this error, try `rustc --explain E0106`.
error: could not compile `chapter10` due to previous error

```
the return type needs a generic lifetime parameter on it because Rust can’t tell whether the reference being returned refers to x or y.

### Lifetime Annotation Syntax

Lifetime annotations describe the interrelations between the lifetimes of multiple references without affecting their actual lifetimes. Just as functions can accept any type when their signatures specify a generic type parameter, functions can accept references with any lifetime by specifying a generic lifetime parameter.

Lifetime annotations start with a `'` that's followed with lowercase letters (for example, `'a`). They're also placed after the `&` of a reference, followed by a space to separate the annotation from the reference's type.

### Lifetime Annotations in Function Signatures

To use lifetime annotations in function signatures, we need to declare generic lifetime parameters inside angle brackets between the function name and the parameter list. The signature should express the following constraint: the returned reference will be valid as long as the parameters are valid. This is the relationship between lifetimes of the parameters and the return value.

```rust
fn longest<'a>(x: &'a str, y: &'a str) -> &'a str {
	if x.len() > y.len() {
		x
	} else {
		y
	}
}
```
<p style="font-size:.8em; font-weight:600">Listing 10-20</p>

- the function signature now tells Rust that for some lifetime `'a`, the function takes two parameters, both of which are string slices that live at least as long as lifetime `'a`
- the function signature also tells Rust that the string slice returned from the function will live at least as long as lifetime `'a`. Which means that the lifetime of the reference returned by the `longest` function is the same as the smaller of the lifetimes of the values referred to by the function arguments

Listing 10-21 is an example using `longest `that produces a lifetime related error:
```rust
fn main() {
    let a = String::from("Hello");
    let res;
    {
        let b = String::from("Hell");
        res = longest(&a, &b);
    }
    println!("{res}");
}
```
<p style="font-size:.8em; font-weight:600">Listing 10-21</p>

- compiler throws error stating `'b' does not live long enough` because `b` is dropped after inner scope ends, which means the value bound to `res` gets dropped as well. So calling `res` inside the `println` after the scope ends yields this error
- if we remove the `println` then the code wouldn't produce an error because we aren't accessing deallocated memory

### Quiz 1
1. Which kind of programming error is a lifetime supposed to prevent?
#### Answer:
Using a reference to an object after its memory has been freed. Lifetimes help identify how long an object is "live", and whether references to that object outlive the object itself.

2. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of the program if it were executed.
```rust
fn shortest<'a, 'b>(x: &'a str, y: &'b str) -> &'a str {
  if x.len() < y.len() {
    x
  } else {
    y
  }
}
fn main() {
  println!("{}", shortest("hello", "rust"));
}
```
#### Answer:
This program does not compile. If the type signature says that the function must return a reference with lifetime `'a`, then it would be invalid to return a reference with a different lifetime `'b`. In this case, the return lifetime is `'a`, but `y` has lifetime `'b`

### Thinking in Terms of Lifetimes
When returning a reference from a function, the lifetime parameter for the return type needs to match the lifetime parameter for one of the parameters
- if the reference returned does not refer to one of the parameters, it must refer to a value created within this function. However, this would be a dangling reference because the value will go out of scope at the end of the function

Lifetime syntax is about connecting the lifetimes of various parameters and return values of functions. Once they’re connected, Rust has enough information to allow memory-safe operations and disallow operations that would create dangling pointers or otherwise violate memory safety.

### Lifetime Annotations in Struct Definitions
We can define structs to hold references, but in that case we would need to add a lifetime annotation on every reference in the struct’s definition.

Like generic data types, we declare the name of the generic lifetime parameter inside angle brackets after the name of the struct. This annotation means the instance of the struct can’t outlive the reference(s) it holds in its field(s).

Listing 10-22 has a struct named `ImportantExcerpt` that holds a string slice.
```rust
struct ImportantExcerpt<'a> {
    part: &'a str,
}

fn main() {
    let novel = String::from("Call me Ishmael. Some years ago...");
    let first_sentence = novel.split('.').next().expect("Could not find a '.'");
    let i = ImportantExcerpt {
        part: first_sentence,
    };
}
```
<p style="font-size:.8em; font-weight:600">Listing 10-22</p>

- This annotation means an instance of `ImportantExcerpt` can’t outlive the reference it holds in its `part` field. Think about lifetimes here in terms of the call stack: first `novel` is defined, then `first_sentence`, and finally `i`. The order in which each variable is dropped is the opposite of how they were initialized. So `i` is dropped first, then `part`, and then `novel`. Now we see that the instance of `ImportantExcerpt` doesn't outlive the reference it holds.

### Lifetime Elision
In early versions (pre-1.0) of Rust, certain code wouldn’t compile because every reference needed an explicit lifetime. At that time, function signatures involving references always required lifetime annotations, like so:
```rust
fn first_word<'a>(s: &'a str) -> &'a str {
```
After writing a lot of Rust code, the Rust team found that programmers were entering the same lifetime annotations over and over in particular situations. These situations were predictable and followed a few deterministic patterns. So they programmed these patterns into the compiler’s code so the borrow checker could infer the lifetimes in these situations and wouldn’t need explicit annotations

The patterns programmed into Rust’s analysis of references are called the ***lifetime elision*** rules. These aren’t rules for programmers to follow; they’re a set of particular cases that the compiler will consider, and if your code fits these cases, you don’t need to write the lifetimes explicitly.

Lifetimes on function or method parameters are called ***input lifetimes***, and lifetimes on return values are called ***output lifetimes***.

The compiler uses three rules to figure out the lifetimes of references that aren’t explicitly annotated. The first rule applies to input lifetimes, and the second and third rules apply to output lifetimes. If the compiler gets to the end of the three rules and there are still references for which it can’t figure out lifetimes, the compiler will stop with an error. These rules apply to `fn` definitions as well as `impl` blocks:

Lifetime Elision Rules:
1. the compiler assigns a different lifetime parameter to each lifetime in each input type. References like `&'_ i32` need a lifetime parameter, and structs like `ImportantExcerpt<'_>` need a lifetime parameter. For example:
    - `fn foo(x: &i32)` gets one lifetime parameter and becomes `fn foo<'a>(x: &'a i32)`.
    - `fn foo(x: &i32, y: &i32)` gets two lifetime parameters and becomes `fn foo<'a, 'b>(x: &'a i32, y: &'b i32)`.
    - `fn foo(x: &ImportantExcerpt)` gets two lifetime parameters and becomes `fn foo<'a, 'b>(x: &'a ImportantExcerpt<'b>)`.
2. if there is exactly one input lifetime parameter, that lifetime is assigned to all output lifetime parameters: `fn foo<'a>(x: &'a i32) -> &'a i32`.
3. if there are multiple input lifetime parameters, but one of them is `&self` or `&mut self` because this is a method, the lifetime of `self` is assigned to all output lifetime parameters. This third rule makes methods much nicer to read and write because fewer symbols are necessary.

### Lifetime Annotations in Method Definitions
We use the same syntax as that of generic type parameters to implement methods on a struct with lifetimes. But where we declare and use the lifetime parameters depends on whether they’re related to the struct fields or the method parameters and return values.
- lifetime names for struct fields always need to be declared after the `impl` keyword and then used after the struct’s name, because those lifetimes are part of the struct’s type.

In method signatures inside `impl` blocks, references might be tied to the lifetime of references in the struct’s fields, or they might be independent
- additionally, the lifetime elision rules often make it so that lifetime annotations aren’t necessary in method signatures

for example, implementing a method `level` for the `ImportantExcerpt` struct:
```rust
impl<'a> ImportantExcerpt<'a> {
    fn level(&self) -> &i32 {
        3
    }
}
```
- The lifetime parameter declaration after `impl` and its use after the type name are required, but we don't need to annotate the lifetime of the reference to `self` because of the first elision rule.

Example where 3rd elision rule applies:
```rust
impl<'a> ImportantExcerpt<'a> {
    fn announce_and_return_part(&self, announcement: &str) -> &str {
        println!("Attention please: {}", announcement);
        self.part
    }
}
```
- there are two input lifetimes, so first lifetime elision rule is applied and gives both `&self` and announcement their own lifetimes. Then, because one of the parameters is `&self`, the return type gets the lifetime of `&self`, and all lifetimes are accounted for

### The Static Lifetime
the `'static` lifetime denotes that the affected reference can live for the entire duration of the program. All string literals have the `'static` lifetime, which we can be annotated like so:
```rust
let s: &'static str = "I have a static lifetime";
```
- this string's text is stored directly in the program’s binary, which is always available. Therefore, the lifetime of all string literals is `'static`

You might see suggestions to use the `'static` lifetime in error messages. But before specifying `'static` as the lifetime for a reference, think about whether the reference you have actually lives the entire lifetime of your program or not, and whether you want it to. Most of the time, an error message suggesting the `'static` lifetime results from attempting to create a dangling reference or a mismatch of the available lifetimes. In such cases, the solution is fixing those problems, not specifying the `'static` lifetime.

### Generic Type Parameters, Trait Bounds, and Lifetimes Together
The syntax of specifying generic type parameters, trait bounds, and lifetimes all in one function!:
```rust
use std::fmt::Display;

fn longest_with_an_announcement<'a, T>(
    x: &'a str,
    y: &'a str,
    ann: T,
) -> &'a str
where
    T: Display,
{
    println!("Announcement! {}", ann);
    if x.len() > y.len() {
        x
    } else {
        y
    }
}
```
- `longest` has an extra parameter named `ann` of the generic type `T`, which can be filled in by any type that implements the `Display` trait as specified by the `where` clause. This extra parameter will be printed using `{}`, which is why the `Display` trait bound is necessary. Because lifetimes are a type of generic, the declarations of the lifetime parameter `'a` and the generic type parameter `T` go in the same list inside the angle brackets after the function name.

### Quiz 2
1. If a reference has a lifetime 'static, then this means:
#### Answer:
The data under the reference lives in the static region of memory. `'static` means "live for the entire program", and so data under a static reference must never be deallocated. while in practice `'static` references are usually not mutable, the meaning of the `'static` lifetime has no essential relationship to mutability.

2. Consider the following un-annotated function signature.
    ```rust
    struct Foo<'a> {
      bar: &'a i32
    }
    fn baz(f: Foo) -> &i32 { /* ... */ }
    ```
    Will Rust accept this function signature? If so, what lifetimes will it infer?
#### Answer:
`fn baz<'a>(f: Foo<'a>) -> &'a i32`. The struct takes a single lifetime parameter, and the output has a single lifetime, so Rust assumes they are the same.

3. Consider the following un-annotated function signature.
    ```rust
    struct Foo<'a> {
        bar: &'a i32
    }
    // Foo changed to &Foo
    fn baz(f: &Foo) -> &i32 { /* ... */ }
    ```
    Will Rust accept this function signature? If so, what lifetimes will it infer?
#### Answer:
Rust will reject this function signature. Rust will not compile this program, because it is ambiguous whether the lifetime of the output is tied to the lifetime of `&Foo` or the reference `Foo.bar`