## Characteristics of Object-Oriented Languages

Arguably, OOP languages share certain common characteristics, namely objects, encapsulation, and
inheritance. Let’s look at what each of those characteristics means and whether Rust supports it.

### Objects Contain Data and Behavior

Object-oriented programs are made up of objects. An object packages both data and the procedures
that operate on that data. The procedures are typically called methods or operations.

Using this definition, Rust is object-oriented. Structs and enums have data, and `impl` blocks for
those structs and enums allow them to have methods.

### Encapsulation that Hides Implementation Details

Another aspect commonly associated with OOP is the idea of encapsulation, which means that the
implementation details of an object aren't accessible to code using that object. Therefore, the only
way to interact with an object is through its public API; code using the object shouldn’t be able to
reach into the object's internals and change data or behavior directly.

With this definition, Rust is object-oriented too. Recall from chapter 7 how we used `pub` to give a
public facing API for our library. If encapsulation is a required aspect for a language to be
considered object-oriented, well Rust meets that requirement. The option to use `pub` or not for
different parts of code enables encapsulation of implementation details.

### Inheritance as a Type System and as Code Sharing

*Inheritance* is a mechanism whereby an object can inherit elements from another object's
definition, thus gaining the parent object's data and behavior without you having to define them
again.

With this definition, Rust isn't object-oriented. There isn't a way to define a struct that inherits
a parent struct's fields. However, there is alternative ways to accomplish something similar
depending on why:
- for reuse of code: you can implement particular behavior for one type, and inheritance enables you
  to reuse that implementation for a different type. You can do this in a limited way in Rust code
  using default trait method implementations.
- to enable a child type to be used in the same places as the parent type. This is also called
  *polymorphism*, which means that you can substitute multiple objects for each other at runtime if
  they share certain characteristics.
  
> ### Polymorphism
> 
> To many people, polymorphism is synonymous with inheritance. But it’s actually a more
> general concept that refers to code that can work with data of multiple types. For inheritance,
> those types are generally subclasses.
> 
> Rust instead uses generics to abstract over different possible types and trait bounds to impose
> constraints on what those types must provide. This is sometimes called
> *bounded parametric polymorphism*.

Inheritance has recently fallen out of favor as a programming design solution in many programming
languages b/c it's often at risk of sharing more code than necessary. Subclasses shouldn't always
share all characteristics of their parent class (as they do so with inheritance). This can make a
program's design less flexible. It also introduces the possibility of calling methods on subclasses
that don't make sense or that cause errors b/c the methods don't apply to the subclass. In addition,
some languages will only allow single inheritance (meaning a subclass can only inherit from one
class), further restricting the flexibility of a program's design.