## Using Trait Objects That Allow for Values of Different Types

Create an example GUI tool that iterates through a list of items, calling a `draw` method on each
one to draw it to the screen. We'll create a library crate called `gui` that contains the structure
of a GUI library. This crate might include some types for people to use, such as `Button` or
`TextField`. In addition, `gui` users will want to create their own types that can be drawn: for
instance, one programmer might add an `Image` and another might add a `SelectBox`

### Defining a Trait for Common Behavior

Define a trait named `Draw` that will have one method named `draw`. Then define a vector that takes
a *trait object*. A ***trait object*** points to both an instance of a type implementing a specified
trait, and a table used to look up trait methods on that type at runtime.
- create a trait object by specifying some sort of pointer (e.g. a `&` reference, `Box<T>` smart
  pointer), then the `dyn` keyword, and then specifying the relevant trait.
- can use trait objects in place of a generic or concrete type.
- wherever a trait object is used, Rust's type system will ensure at compile time that any value
  used in that context will implement the trait object's trait.
  - consequently, we don't need to know all possible types at compile time.
  
Trait objects are more like objects in other languages in that they combine data and behavior. But
trait objects differ from traditional objects in that data can't be added to them. Trait objects
(generally) aren't as useful as objects in other languages: their specific purpose is to allow
abstraction across common behavior.

Define a trait named `Draw` with one method named `draw`. Define a struct named `Screen` that holds
a vector named `components`. This vector is of type `Box<dyn Draw>` (a trait object), a stand-in for
any type inside a `Box` that implements the `Draw` trait. On the `Screen` struct, define a method
named `run` that calls `draw` on each of its `components`.

```rust
pub trait Draw {
    fn draw(&self);
}

pub struct Screen {
    pub components: Vec<Box<dyn Draw>>,
}

impl Screen {
    pub fn run(&self) {
        self.components.iter().for_each(|item| item.draw());
    }
}
```

This works differently from defining a struct that uses a generic type parameter with trait bounds.
A generic type parameter can only be substituted with one concrete type at a time, whereas trait
objects allow for multiple concrete types to fill in for the trait object at runtime. For example,
we could have defined the `Screen` struct using a generic type and a trait bound

```rust
pub struct Screen<T: Draw> {
    pub components: Vec<T>,
}

impl<T> Screen<T>
where
    T: Draw,
{
    pub fn run(&self) {
        for component in self.components.iter() {
            component.draw();
        }
    }
}
```
- This restricts us to a `Screen` instance that has a list of components of the same type (e.g.
  `Button`, `TextField`, etc.). If you'll only ever have homogeneous collections, using generics and
  trait bounds is preferable because the definitions will be monomorphized at compile time to use
  the concrete types.
- But with the method using trait objects, one `Screen` instance can hold a `Vec<T>`
  that contains a `Box<Button>` as well as a `Box<TextField>`.

### Implementing the Trait

Create the `Button` type. The `Button` struct might have fields for `width`, `height`, and `label`.

```rust
pub struct Button {
    pub width: usize,
    pub height: usize,
    pub label: String,
}

impl Draw for Button {
    fn draw(&self) {
        println!("Button has been drawn.");
        // button drawing code
    }
}
```

If someone using the library decided to implement a `SelectBox` struct that has `width`, `height`,
and `options` fields, they implement the `Draw` trait on the `SelectBox` type as well:

```rust
use gui::Draw;

struct SelectBox {
    width: u32,
    height: u32,
    options: Vec<String>,
}

impl Draw for SelectBox {
    fn draw(&self) {
        // code to actually draw a select box
    }
}
```

### Using the Trait

The library's user can now write their `main` function to create a `Screen` instance and add a
`SelectBox` and a `Button` to it by putting each in a `Box<T>` to become a trait object. They can
then call `run` on the `Screen` instance, which will call `draw` on each of the `components`.

When writing the library, we didn't know that someone might add the `SelectBox` type, but our
`Screen` implementation was able to operate on the new type and draw it b/c `SelectBox` implements
the `Draw` trait.

This concept (being concerned only with the messages a value responds to rather than the value's
concrete type) is similar to the concept of *duck typing* in dynamically typed languages: if it
walks like a duck and quacks like a duck, then it must be a duck!

The advantage of using trait objects and Rust's type system to write code similar to duck typing
code is that we never have to check whether a value implements a particular method at runtime, or
worry about getting errors if a value doesn't implement a method but we call it anyway. Rust won't
compile our code if the values don't implement the traits that the trait objects need.

### Trait Objects and Type Inference

One downside to using trait objects is how they interact with type inference.

e.g. consider type inference for `Vec<T>`. When `T` isn't a trait object, Rust just needs to know
the type of a single element in the vector to infer `T`. So an empty vector causes a type inference
error. Now say we try to factor the `components` array for `Screen` into a separate variable in
`main`, the compiler would reject the program with a mismatched types error if there are differently
typed components in it:

```rust
fn main() {
    let components = vec![
        Box::new(SelectBox { /* .. */ }),
        Box::new(Button { /* .. */ }),
    ];
    let screen = Screen { components };
    screen.run();
}
```
```error[E0308]: mismatched types
   --> test.rs:55:14
    |
55  |       Box::new(Button {
    |  _____--------_^
    | |     |
    | |     arguments to this function are incorrect
56  | |       width: 50,
57  | |       height: 10,
58  | |       label: String::from("OK"),
59  | |     }),
    | |_____^ expected `SelectBox`, found `Button`
```

the compiler lost the information for type inference at the point where `components` is defined. To
fix this issue, give a hint to the type inference algorithm. It can either be an explicit cast on
any element of the vector or a type annotation on the let-binding:
```rust
    let components = vec![
        Box::new(SelectBox { /* .. */ }) as Box<dyn Draw>,
        Box::new(Button { /* .. */ }),
    ];
    // or
    let components: Vec<Box<dyn Draw>> = vec![
        Box::new(SelectBox { /* .. */ }),
        Box::new(Button { /* .. */ }),
    ];
```

It's good to be aware that using trait objects can cause a worse developer experience for API
clients in the case of type inference.

### Trait Objects Perform Dynamic Dispatch

Recall from Chapter 10 the discussion on the monomorphization process performed by the compiler when
using trait bounds on generics: the compiler generates nongeneric implementations of functions and
methods for each concrete type that we use in place of a generic type parameter. The code that
results from ***monomorphization*** is doing static dispatch (when the compiler knows what method
you're calling at compile time). This is opposed to ***dynamic dispatch***, which is when the
compiler can't tell at compile time which method you're calling. In dynamic dispatch cases, the
compiler emits code at runtime that will figure out which method to call.

When we use trait objects, Rust must use dynamic dispatch. The compiler doesn't know all the types
that might be used with the code that's using trait objects, so it doesn't know which method
implemented on which type to call. Instead, at runtime, Rust uses the pointers inside the trait
object to know which method to call. This lookup incurs a runtime cost that doesn't occur with
static dispatch. Dynamic dispatch also prevents the compiler from choosing to inline a method's
code, which in turn prevents some optimizations.

### Quiz

1. Determine whether the program will pass the compiler. If it passes, write the expected output of
   the program if it were executed.

    ```rust
    use std::fmt::Debug;
    fn main() {
        let n = 1;
        let s = String::from("Hello");
        let v: Vec<&dyn Debug> = vec![&n, &s];
        let n_ref = v[0] as &i32;
        println!("{}", n_ref + 1);
    }
    ```

***Answer:*** Doesn't compile.

- Unlike some OOP languages, a trait object cannot be "downcasted" to a more concrete type (except
  in the case of the [Any](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/any/index.html) trait).

---

2. Consider implementing a generic function in two ways:

    ```rust
    fn f_opt1<T: SomeTrait>(t: &T) { /* ... */ }
    fn f_opt2(t: &dyn SomeTrait) { /* ... */ }
    ```

    In most cases, which of the following are good reasons to prefer the trait object version
    (`f_opt2`) over the type-parametric version (`f_opt1`)? Select each that applies.
    
***Answer:*** Faster compile times. Smaller binary size.

- By avoiding monomorphization, trait-object functions will be both faster to compile and produce
  smaller binaries. However, this usually comes at the cost of runtime performance. Trait objects
  are rarely easier for developers to work with than trait-bounded generics.