## Implementing an Object-Oriented Design Pattern

The ***state pattern*** is an object-oriented design pattern. The crux of the pattern is that we
define a set of states a value can have internally. The states are represented by a set of ***state
objects***, and the value's behavior changes based on its state. We're going to work through an
example of a blog post struct that has a field to hold its state, which will be a state object from
the set "draft", "review", or "published".

The state objects share functionality: in Rust we use structs and traits rather than objects and
inheritance. Each state object is responsible for its own behavior and for governing when it should
change into another state. The value that holds a state object knows nothing about the different
behavior of the states or when to transition between states.

The advantage of using the state pattern is that, when the business requirements of the program
change, we won't need to change the code of the value holding the state or the code that uses the
value. We'll only need to update the code inside one of the state objects to change its rules or
perhaps add more state objects.

First, we're going to implement the state pattern in a more traditional object-oriented way, then
we'll use an approach that's more Rust-like.

The final functionality:

- A blog post starts as an empty draft.
- When the draft is done, a review of the post is requested.
- When the post is approved, it gets published.
- Only published blog posts return content to print, so unapproved posts can't accidentally be
  published.

Any other changes attempted on a post should have no effect. e.g. if we try to approve a draft blog
post before requesting a review, the post should remain an unpublished draft.

We want to allow the user to create a new draft blog post with `Post::new`. We want to allow text to
be added to the blog post. If we try to get the post's content immediately, before approval, we
shouldn't get any text because the post is still a draft.

Next, we want to enable a request for a review of the post, and we want `content` to return an empty
string while waiting for the review. When the post receives approval, it should get published,
meaning the text of the post will be returned when `content` is called.

```rust
// blog/src/lib.rs

pub struct Post {
    state: Option<Box<dyn State>>,
    content: String,
}

impl Post {
    pub fn new() -> Post {
        Post {
            state: Some(Box::new(Draft {})),
            content: String::new(),
        }
    }
}

trait State {}

struct Draft {}

impl State for Draft {}
```

- The `State` trait defines the behavior shared by different post states. The state objects are
  `Draft`, `PendingReview`, and `Published`, and they will all implement the `State` trait.

### Storing the Text of the Post Content

We want to be able to call a method named `add_text` (for `Post`) and pass it a `&str` that is then
added as the text content of the blog post.

```rust
// blog/src/lib.rs

    pub fn add_text(&mut self, text: &str) {
        self.content.push_str(text);
    }
```

### Ensuring the Content of a Draft Post Is Empty

Even after calling `add_text` and added some content to the post, the content method should return
an empty string slice b/c the post is still in the draft state.

```rust
// blog/src/lib.rs

    pub fn content(&self) -> &str {
        ""
    }
```

### Requesting a Review of the Post Changes Its State

Now add functionality to request a review of a post, which should change its state from `Draft` to
`PendingReview`.

```rust
// blog/src/lib.rs

impl Post {
    // --snip--
    pub fn request_review(&mut self) {
        if let Some(s) = self.state.take() {
            self.state = Some(s.request_review())
        }
    }
}

trait State {
    fn request_review(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State>;
}

struct Draft {}

impl State for Draft {
    fn request_review(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State> {
        Box::new(PendingReview {})
    }
}

struct PendingReview {}

impl State for PendingReview {
    fn request_review(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State> {
        self
    }
}
```

- we give `Post` a public method named `request_review` that'll take a mutable reference to `self`.
  Then we call an internal `request_review` method on the current state of `Post`, and this second
  `request_review` method consumes the current state and returns a new state.
- we add the `request_review` method to the `State` trait; all types that implement the trait will
  now need to implement the `request_review` method. Note that rather than having `self`, `&self`,
  or `&mut self` as the first parameter of the method, we have `self: Box<Self>`. This syntax means
  the method is only valid when called on a `Box` holding the type. This syntax takes ownership of
  `Box<Self>`, invalidating the old state so the state value of the `Post` can transform into a new
  state.
  - To consume the old state, the `request_review` method needs to take ownership of the state
    value. This is where Option in the `state` field of `Post` comes in: we call the `take` method
    to take the `Some` value out of the state field and leave a `None` in its place, b/c Rust
    doesn't allow unpopulated fields in structs. This lets us move the state value out of `Post`
    rather than borrowing it. Then we'll set the post's state value to the result of this operation.
  - need to set `state` to `None` temporarily to get ownership of the `state` value, ensuring `Post`
    can't use the old `state` value after transforming it into a new `state`.
- `request_review` on `Draft` returns a new, boxed instance of a new `PendingReview`, representing
  the state when a post is waiting for a review. `PendingReview` also implements `request_review`
  but doesn't do any transformations. Rather, it returns itself, b/c when we request a review on a
  post already in the `PendingReview` state, it should stay in the `PendingReview` state.

See the advantages of the state pattern? The `request_review` method on `Post` is the same no matter
its `state` value. Each state is responsible for its own rules.

### Adding approve to Change the Behavior of content

The `approve` method will be similar to the `request_review` method: it'll set `state` to the value
that the current state says it should have when that state is approved.

```rust
impl Post {
    // --snip--
    pub fn approve(&mut self) {
        if let Some(s) = self.state.take() {
            self.state = Some(s.approve())
        }
    }
}

trait State {
    fn request_review(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State>;
    fn approve(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State>;
}

struct Draft {}

impl State for Draft {
    // --snip--
    fn approve(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State> {
        self
    }
}

struct PendingReview {}

impl State for PendingReview {
    // --snip--
    fn approve(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State> {
        Box::new(Published {})
    }
}

struct Published {}

impl State for Published {
    fn request_review(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State> {
        self
    }

    fn approve(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State> {
        self
    }
}
```

- added `approve` to the `State` trait and add a new struct that implements `State`, the `Published`
  state.
  - Similar to how `request_review` on `PendingReview` works, if we call the `approve` method on a
    `Draft`, it'll have no effect b/c `approve` will return `self`. When we call approve on
    `PendingReview`, it returns a new, boxed instance of the `Published` struct. The `Published`
    struct implements the `State` trait, and for both the `request_review` method and the `approve`
    method, it returns itself, because the post should stay in the `Published` state in those cases.

Next update the `content` method on `Post`. The value returned from `content` should depend on the
current state of the `Post`, so we're going to have the `Post` delegate to a `content` method
defined on its `state`.

```rust
    pub fn content(&self) -> &str {
        self.state.as_ref().unwrap().content(self)
    }
```

Add `content` to the `State` trait definition, and that is where we'll put the logic for what
content to return depending on which state we have

```rust
trait State {
    // --snip--
    fn content<'a>(&self, post: &'a Post) -> &'a str {
        ""
    }
}

// --snip--
struct Published {}

impl State for Published {
    // --snip--
    fn content<'a>(&self, post: &'a Post) -> &'a str {
        &post.content
    }
}
```

We've implemented the state pattern with the rules of the blog post workflow. The logic related to
the rules lives in the state objects rather than being scattered throughout `Post`.

> ### Why Not An Enum?
> 
> You may have been wondering why we didn’t use an enum with the different possible post states as
> variants. That’s certainly a possible solution, try it and compare the end results to see which you
> prefer! One disadvantage of using an enum is every place that checks the value of the enum will
> need a match expression or similar to handle every possible variant. This could get more repetitive
> than this trait object solution.

### Trade-offs of the State Pattern

Downsides of the state pattern:
- b/c the states implement the transitions between states, some states are coupled to each other. If
  we add another state between `PendingReview` and `Published` (e.g. `Scheduled`), we would have to
  change the code in `PendingReview` to transition to `Scheduled` instead. It would be less work if
  `PendingReview` didn't need to change with the addition of a new state (that would mean switching
  to another design pattern).
- we've duplicated some logic. To eliminate some of the duplication, we might try to make default
  implementations for the `request_review` and `approve` methods on the `State` trait that return
  `self`; however, this would violate object safety b/c the trait doesn't know what the concrete
  `self` will be exactly. We want to be able to use `State` as a trait object, so its methods need
  to be object safe.
  - other duplication includes the similar implementations of the `request_review` and `approve`
    methods on `Post`. Both methods delegate to the implementation of the same method on the value
    in the `state` field of `Option` and set the new value of the `state` field to the result. If we
    had a lot of methods on `Post` that followed this pattern, we might consider defining a macro to
    eliminate the repetition.

By implementing the state pattern exactly as it's defined for object-oriented languages, we're not
taking as full advantage of Rust's strengths as we could.

#### Encoding States and Behavior as Types

Rather than encapsulating the states and transitions completely so outside code has no knowledge of
them, we'll encode the states into different types. Consequently, Rust's type checking system will
prevent attempts to use draft posts where only published posts are allowed by issuing a compiler
error.

Instead of having a `content` method on a draft post that returns an empty string, make it so draft
posts don't have the `content` method at all. That way the compiler errors saying `content` doesn't
exist for draft posts. This means it'll be impossible to display draft post content in production
since the code won't compile.

```rust
pub struct Post {
    content: String,
}

pub struct DraftPost {
    content: String,
}

impl Post {
    pub fn new() -> DraftPost {
        DraftPost {
            content: String::new(),
        }
    }

    pub fn content(&self) -> &str {
        &self.content
    }
}

impl DraftPost {
    pub fn add_text(&mut self, text: &str) {
        self.content.push_str(text);
    }
}
```

- The structs no longer have the `state` field because we're moving the encoding of the state to the
  types of structs. The `Post` struct will represent a published post, and it has a content method
  that returns the content.
- Note that `DraftPost` doesn't have a `content` method. Now the program ensures that all posts
  start as draft posts, and don't allow their content to be displayed.
  
#### Implementing Transitions as Transformations into Different Types

We want to enforce the rule that a draft post has to be reviewed and approved before it can be
published. A post in the pending review state should still not display any content. Implement these
constraints by adding the struct `PendingReviewPost`, defining the `request_review` method on
`DraftPost` to return a `PendingReviewPost`, and defining an `approve` method on `PendingReviewPost`
to return a `Post`.

```rust
impl DraftPost {
    // --snip--
    pub fn request_review(self) -> PendingReviewPost {
        PendingReviewPost {
            content: self.content,
        }
    }
}

pub struct PendingReviewPost {
    content: String,
}

impl PendingReviewPost {
    pub fn approve(self) -> Post {
        Post {
            content: self.content,
        }
    }
}
```

- `request_review` and `approve` take ownership of `self`, consuming the `DraftPost` and
  `PendingReviewPost` instances and transforming them into a `PendingReviewPost` and a published
  `Post`. This way, there's no lingering `DraftPost` instances after calling `request_review`
  on them.

B/c of this change, `main` needs to be changed too:

```rust
use blog::Post;

fn main() {
    let mut post = Post::new();

    post.add_text("I ate a salad for lunch today");

    let post = post.request_review();

    let post = post.approve();

    assert_eq!("I ate a salad for lunch today", post.content());
}
```

The changes made to `main` to reassign `post` means that this version of the implementation doesn't
follow OO state pattern. The transformations between states aren't entirely encapsulated w/in `Post`
anymore. But, now invalid states are impossible b/c of Rust's type system.

### Summary

We now know that trait objects can be used to implement some OO features in Rust. Dynamic dispatch
can give code some flexibility in exchange for some runtime performance. The flexibility can be used
to implement OO patterns that help code maintainability. But also know that OO patterns won't always
be the best way to take advantage of Rust's strengths.

### Quiz

1. In the running example from this section, a blog post could have one of three states: Draft,
   PendingReview, and Published. In the example, each state was represented as a struct, and state
   transitions was represented as trait methods returning trait objects.

   An alternative implementation could represent the states as an enum, like this:

   ```rust
   enum BlogState {
       Draft,
       PendingReview,
       Published
   }
   impl Post {
       fn request_review(&mut self) {
           use BlogState::*;
           self.state = match self.state {
               Draft => PendingReview,
               PendingReview => PendingReview,
               Published => Published
           }
       }
   }
   ```

   Which of the following are good reasons to prefer the struct/trait representation over the enum
   representation?

***Answer:*** Adding a new state does not require modifying methods on every other state. An API
client could add a new state to the system

- The struct/trait approach is extensible in the sense that an API client could potentially create a
  new state (such as `Retracted`) without changing the core API functionality. When adding this
  state, the methods for other states do not need to be changed. Whereas with enums, a client cannot
  add a new branch to the enum. Moreover, all `match` expressions must be updated when a state is
  added.

  A match is not likely to be slower than dynamic dispatch. A match is a simple branch based on an
  enum's tag, while dynamic dispatch requires a layer of indirection through a trait object's
  virtual table with non-inlined function calls.

  An API client cannot add a new *method* for existing states in the struct/trait approach, they can
  only add new states. The methods are fixed by the API author's trait definition. Note that you
  could add a new method which only builds on existing methods via extension traits, such as:

  ```rust
  trait StateExt {
      fn request_review_twice(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State>;
  }
  
  impl<S: State> StateExt for S {
      fn request_review_twice(self: Box<Self>) -> Box<dyn State> {
          self.request_review().request_review()
      }
  }
  ```
  But these extensions cannot read the private data of the states.