## Ownership Inventory #4

> This section isn't in the official "The Rust Programming Language" book.

### Program 1

```rust
/// Adds the string `s` to all elements of 
/// the input iterator
fn concat_all(
    iter: impl Iterator<Item = String>,
    s: &str
) -> impl Iterator<Item = String> {
    iter.map(move |s2| s2 + s)
}
```

---

1. If you tried to compile program 1, which of the following best describes the compiler error
   you would get?

   ***Answer:*** the returned iterator captures a lifetime that isn't in the bounds of `impl
   Iterator<Item = String>`

- The string reference `s` has an implicit lifetime `'a`. The closure passed to `iter.map(..)`
  captures this string reference, but the type `impl Iterator<Item = String>` does not mention `'a`.
  Therefore the iterator captures a lifetime not in its bounds.

---

2. Normally if you try to compile this function, the compiler returns the following error:

   ```
   error[E0700]: hidden type for `impl Iterator<Item = String>` captures lifetime that does not appear in bounds
    --> test.rs:7:5
     |
   5 |     s: &str
     |        ---- hidden type `Map<impl Iterator<Item = String>, [closure@test.rs:7:14: 7:23]>` captures the anonymous lifetime defined here
   6 | ) -> impl Iterator<Item = String> {
   7 |     iter.map(move |s2| s2 + s)
   ```

   Assume that the compiler did NOT reject this function. Which (if any) of the following programs
   would (1) pass the compiler, and (2) possibly cause undefined behavior if executed? Check each
   program that satisfies both criteria, OR check "None of these programs" if none are satisfying.
   
   ***Answer:***
   ```rust
   let v = vec![String::from("Rust")];
   let it = {
       let s = String::from("Yes");
       concat_all(v.into_iter(), &s)
   };
   it.collect::<Vec<_>>();
   ```

- If the returned iterator isn't related to the lifetime of `s`, then memory safety is violated if:

  1. `s` does not live forever (i.e. it's not `&'static str` like a string literal)
  2. the return value of `concat_all` is used after `s` is dropped

  Then the expression `s2 + s` would dereference `s`, a read of deallocated memory.

---

3. Of the following fixes (highlighted in yellow), which fix best satisfies these three criteria:

   1. The fixed function passes the Rust compiler,
   2. The fixed function preserves the intention of the original code, and
   3. The fixed function does not introduce unnecessary inefficiencies
   
   ***Answer:***
   ```rust
   fn concat_all<'a>(
       iter: impl Iterator<Item = String> + 'a,
       s: &'a str
   ) -> impl Iterator<Item = String> + 'a {
       iter.map(move |s2| s2 + s)
   }
   ```
   
- To fix this issue, we need to express the relationship between the lifetimes of `iter`, `s`, and
  the return type. The best way to do this is a lifetime variable `<'a>` and require that `iter` and
  `s` both live for `'a`, and that the output type also lives for `'a`.
  
---

### Program 2

```rust
/// Adds a Display-able object into a vector of 
/// Display trait objects
use std::fmt::Display;
fn add_displayable<T: Display>(
    v: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Display>>, 
    t: T
) {
    v.push(Box::new(t));
}
```

---

4. If you tried to compile program 2, which of the following best describes the compiler error
   you would get?
   
   ***Answer:*** the type `T` does not live long enough when cast to a trait object

- When casting `Box<T>` to `Box<dyn Display>` (implicitly in `v.push(..)`), Rust requires that the
  trait object `dyn Display` must outlive the vector. However, the lifetime of `T` is unspecified,
  so `T` may not live long enough.

---

5. Normally if you try to compile this function, the compiler returns the following error:
   ```
   error[E0310]: the parameter type `T` may not live long enough
    --> test.rs:6:12
     |
   6 |     v.push(Box::new(t));
     |            ^^^^^^^^^^^
      ```
   Assume that the compiler did NOT reject this function. Which (if any) of the following programs
   would (1) pass the compiler, and (2) possibly cause undefined behavior if executed? Check each
   program that satisfies both criteria, OR check "None of these programs" if none are satisfying.
   
   ***Answer:***
   ```rust
   let mut v: Vec<Box<dyn Display>> = Vec::new();
   {
       let n = 0;
       add_displayable(&mut v, &n);
   }
   println!("{}", v[0]);
   ```

- This program is memory-unsafe. To create a memory safety violation, the program must create a type
  `T` that contains references which do not outlive the vector. For example, adding `&n` where `n`
  goes out of scope before `v` means that the later use of `v[0]` is a read of deallocated memory.

---

6. Of the following fixes (highlighted in yellow), which fix best satisfies these three criteria:

   1. The fixed function passes the Rust compiler,
   2. The fixed function preserves the intention of the original code, and
   3. The fixed function does not introduce unnecessary inefficiencies
   
   ***Answer:***
   ```rust
   fn add_displayable<'a, T: Display + 'a>(
       v: &mut Vec<Box<dyn Display + 'a>>, 
       t: T
   ) {
       v.push(Box::new(t));
   }
   ```
   
- The most idiomatic fix is to specify how the lifetime of `T` should relate to the lifetime of the
  trait object `dyn Display`. Here, that means adding a lifetime parameter `'a`, saying that `T`
  outlives `'a`, and that the trait objects also live for at least `'a`.

  Using a `'static` bound is the same thing but worse: it is simply less expressive, disallowing the
  vector's trait objects from ever holding references. Putting the lifetime `'a` on the `&'a mut
  Vec<..>` reference is not correct and does not fix the compiler error.