# Design Trade-offs

> This section isn't in the official "The Rust Programming Language" book.

This section is about design trade-offs in Rust. To be an effective Rust engineer, it's not enough
just to know how Rust works. You have to decide which of Rust's many tools are appropriate for a
given job. In this section, we give a sequence of quizzes about your understanding of design
trade-offs in Rust. After each quiz, we explain in-depth the rationale for each question.

## References

> ### Question 1
> 
> **Context**: You are designing a simple asset manager for a game engine.
> 
> **Functionality**: An API client will provide paths of assets to load, and gets back access to the
> loaded assets.
> 
> **Assumptions**: You may assume that loads happen synchronously and instantaneously.
> 
> **Designs**: Below are several proposed designs to implement the functionality.
> 
> ```rust
> pub struct AssetManager {
>     // ...
> }
> 
> // Option 1: return a reference
> impl AssetManager {
>     pub fn load(&mut self, path: PathBuf) -> &Asset;
> }
> 
> // Option 2: return a mutable reference
> impl AssetManager {
>     pub fn load(&mut self, path: PathBuf) -> &mut Asset;
> }
> 
> // Option 3: return a reference-counted pointer
> impl AssetManager {
>     pub fn load(&mut self, path: PathBuf) -> Rc<Asset>;
> }
> 
> // Option 4: return a copyable handle that can be turned into a reference
> #[derive(Copy, Clone)]
> pub struct AssetHandle(usize);
> 
> impl AssetManager {
>     pub fn load(&mut self, path: PathBuf) -> AssetHandle;
>     pub fn get(&self, handle: AssetHandle) -> &Asset;
> }
> ```
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 1a
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: Once loaded, an asset should be permanently immutable.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 1, 3, 4
> 
> - The immutability of assets is enforced by types that don't permit mutating operations. Both an
>   immutable borrow `&Asset` and an immutable smart-pointer like `Rc` don't permit mutating
>   operations. Therefore Options 1, 3, and 4 DO satisfy this requirement. Option 2 returns a
>   mutable borrow, which does NOT satisfy the requirement.
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 1b
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: Clients of the asset manager need to retain access to assets across several
> short-term borrows of the asset manager.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 3, 4
> 
> - "Retaining access across borrows" means the client wants to write a program like this:
>   ```rust
>   let asset = {
>       let manager = get_manager();
>       manager.load("some/path")
>   };
>   process_asset(asset);
>   let another_asset = {
>       let manager = get_manager();
>       manager.load("another/path")
>   };
>   ```
>   In this case, the lifetime of the value returned by `load` must not be tied to the lifetime of
>   the `AssetManager`. Options 1 and 2 require that the `&Asset` and `&mut Asset` only live as long
>   as the `&mut self`. Therefore the borrow checker would reject programs like the one above where
>   an asset outlives the manager reference. Options 1 and 2 do NOT satisfy the requirement.
> 
>   Options 3 and 4 DO satisfy the requirement. The lifetime of `Rc<Asset>` isn't tied to the
>   lifetime of `&mut self`. Similarly, the lifetime of `AssetHandle` isn't tied to the lifetime of
>   `&mut self`.
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 1c
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: It is important that all assets be deallocated at a single, predictable time.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 1, 2, 4
> 
> - To deallocate all assets at a single time, the `AssetManager` must retain exclusive ownership
>   over them. Therefore when the `AssetManager` is dropped (or otherwise instructed to deallocate
>   assets), it is guaranteed that all of the assets can be safely dropped. Options 1, 2, and 4 DO
>   satisfy this requirement. Option 4 would require that `AssetManager::get` panics if the client
>   calls `manager.get(handle)` after an asset has been deallocated. If there's a real chance a
>   client may do this, another alternative would be for `get` to return `Option<&Asset>`.
> 
>   Option 3 does NOT satisfy this requirement. Reference-counted pointers are jointly owned by
>   every owner of an `Rc<Asset>`. The `AssetManager` has no good way to ensure that all assets have
>   no other owners at deallocation time.

## Trait Trees

> ### Question 2
> 
> **Context**: You are designing a simple user interface framework that consists of a tree of
> widgets, such as text and buttons.
> 
> **Functionality**: The API provides a Widget trait that defines how a widget works. The API client
> implements the Widget trait, and calls it to render a UI.
> 
> **Designs**: Below are several proposed designs to implement the functionality.
> 
> ```rust
> // Option 1: children must be Self
> pub trait Widget: Sized {
>     fn render(&self) -> Vec<Self>;
> }
> 
> // Option 2: children are a trait parameter
> pub trait Widget<Children> {
>     fn render(&self) -> Vec<Children>;
> }
> 
> // Option 3: children are an associated type
> pub trait Widget {
>     type Children: Widget;
>     fn render(&self) -> Vec<Self::Children>;
> }
> 
> // Option 4: children are a reference trait object
> pub trait Widget {
>     fn render(&self) -> Vec<&dyn Widget>;
> }
> 
> // Option 5: children are a boxed trait object
> pub trait Widget {
>     fn render(&self) -> Vec<Box<dyn Widget>>;
> }
> ```
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 2a
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: The API client is expected to provide a single `WidgetImpl` enum representing all
> possible widgets, and implement the `Widget` trait for `WidgetImpl`.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 1
> 
> - If we represent all possible widgets as a single enum, like this:
> 
>   ```rust
>   enum WidgetImpl {
>       Button { /* .. */ },
>       Text { /* .. */ },
>       // ..
>   }
>   
>   impl Widget for WidgetImpl { /* .. */ }
>   ```
>   Then we have a "closed world" system where there is a non-extensible set of possible widgets.
>   There is only one implementation of `Widget`, and no need for dynamic dispatch. Therefore only
>   Option 1 makes sense, because render would only ever return other `WidgetImpl` types. All other
>   designs contain unnecessary complexity under this requirement.
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 2b
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: The API client is expected to provide a unique struct for each possible widget,
> and implement the `Widget` trait for each struct. Each widget can return a vector containing
> widgets of any possible type.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 4, 5
> 
> - Unlike the previous question, now we expect to have a distinct type for each widget, like:
> 
>   ```rust
>   struct Button { /* .. */ }
>   impl Widget for Button { /* .. */ }
>   
>   struct Text { /* .. */ }
>   impl Widget for Text { /* .. */ }
>   ```
> 
>   Therefore a vector of widgets needs to be heterogeneous, i.e., it could contain widgets of
>   distinct types. Options 1, 2, and 3 all constrain each `Widget::render` implementation to return
>   a vector of a single widget type. Options 4 and 5 use dynamic dispatch via trait objects to
>   permit heterogeneous widget vectors.
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 2c
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: Only types that implement the Widget trait should be returned from render.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 1, 3, 4, 5
> 
> - The `Widget` trait in Option 2 does not constrain that `Children: Widget`. All other options do
>   ensure return a `Vec<W>` for some `W` where `W: Widget`.

## Dispatch

> ### Question 3
> 
> **Context**: You are designing a simple event system that calls callback functions in response to
> events.
> 
> **Functionality**: An Events struct provides functions to register callbacks. A callback is either
> parallelizable (runnable across multiple threads) or sequential (must be run only on the main
> thread).
> 
> **Designs**: Below are several proposed designs to implement the functionality.
> 
> ```rust
> pub struct Events {
>     // ...
> }
> 
> // Option 1: parallel and sequential are two separate methods
> impl Events {
>     pub fn register<E, F: Fn(E)>(&mut self, f: F) { /* .. */ }
>     pub fn register_sequential<E, F: Fn(E)>(&mut self, f: F) { /* .. */ }
> }
> 
> // Option 2: parallel and sequential are two members of an enum
> pub enum Callback<F> {
>     Parallel(F),
>     Sequential(F)
> }
> impl Events {
>     pub fn register<E, F: Fn(E)>(&mut self, f: Callback<F>) { /* .. */ }
> }
> 
> // Option 3: parallel and sequential are markers in a trait method
> pub trait Register<Marker, F, E> {
>     fn register(&mut self, f: F);
> }
> pub struct Parallel;
> pub struct Sequential;
> impl<F, E> Register<Parallel, F, E> for Events 
> where F: Fn(E) {
>     fn register(&mut self, f: F) { /* .. */ }
> }
> impl<F, E> Register<Sequential, F, E> for Events 
> where F: Fn(Sequential, E) {
>     fn register(&mut self, f: F) { /* .. */ }
> }
> ```
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 3a
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: A callback should be considered parallelizable by default, and the API should
> reflect that default behavior.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 1, 3
> 
> - First, let's imagine what it would look like to register a callback under each design.
>   
>   ```rust
>   // Option 1
>   events.register(|e: OnClick| { /* .. */ });
>   events.register_sequential(|e: OnClick| { /* .. */ })
>   
>   // Option 2
>   events.register(Callback::Parallel(|e: OnClick| { /* .. */ }));
>   events.register(Callback::Sequential(|e: OnClick| { /* .. */ }));
>   
>   // Option 3
>   events.register(|e: OnClick| { /* .. */ });
>   events.register(|_: Sequential, e: OnClick| { /* .. */ });
>   ```
>   
>   Of these options, Options 1 and 3 convey that parallel is the default mode as it corresponds to
>   the simplest option. Being sequential requires either using a longer method name (`_sequential`)
>   or a marker type (`_: Sequential`).
>   
>   Option 2 does not clearly mark that parallel should be default because both `Parallel` and
>   `Sequential` must be passed in to register.
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 3b
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: The API should export as few methods as possible.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 2, 3
> 
> - Options 2 and 3 only have a single register method. Option 1 has two differently named register
>   methods.
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 3c
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: The API should lean on the compiler's type inference system as little as
> possible.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 1, 2
> 
> - Options 1 and 2 do not require much type inference beyond determining the type of the function
>   F.
>   
>   Option 3 uses an overloading trick by creating a `Register` trait parameterized over a "marker"
>   type. Remember its two register calls:
>   
>   ```rust
>   events.register(|e: OnClick| { /* .. */ })
>   events.register(|_: Sequential, e: OnClick| { /* .. */ })
>   ```
> 
>   These look like they use the same implementation, but they actually refer to different
>   implementations of the same method. This implementation relies on the compiler to infer the type
>   of `Marker` when resolving which implementation of `Register` that each `.register(..)` call
>   corresponds to. Therefore if our goal is to not rely on type inference, then Option 3 is
>   inappropriate.

## Intermediates

> ### Question 4
> 
> **Context**: You are designing a serialization library that converts Rust data types into formats
> like JSON.
> 
> **Functionality**: A `Serialize` trait that can be implemented by serializable types, and a
> `to_json` function that converts serializable types into JSON.
> 
> **Designs**: Below are several proposed designs to implement the functionality.
> 
> ```rust
> // Option 1: types serialize to a `Value` enum
> pub enum Value {
>     String(String),
>     Number(isize)
> }
> 
> pub trait Serialize {
>     fn serialize(&self) -> Value;
> }
> 
> fn value_to_json(value: Value) -> String {
>     /* .. */
> }
> 
> pub fn to_json(data: impl Serialize) -> String {
>     let value = data.serialize();
>     value_to_json(value)
> }
> 
> 
> // Option 2: types serialize via calls to a `Serializer` interface
> pub trait Serialize {
>     fn serialize<S: Serializer>(&self, serializer: &mut S);
> }
> 
> pub trait Serializer {
>     fn serialize_string(&mut self, s: &str);
>     fn serialize_number(&mut self, n: isize);
> }
> 
> struct JsonSerializer { buffer: String };
> impl Serializer for JsonSerializer {
>     /* .. */
> }
> 
> pub fn to_json(data: impl Serialize) -> String {
>     let mut serializer = JsonSerializer { buffer: String::new() };
>     data.serialize(&mut serializer);
>     serializer.buffer
> }
> ```
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 4a
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: It should be possible to add a new data format without needing to modify code in
> existing implementations of the `Serialize` trait.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 1, 2
> 
> - Both designs are sufficiently decoupled such that each new data format is independent of any
>   `Serialize` implementations. For Option 1, each data format converts a `Value` into the format's
>   representation. `Value` acts as a module boundary.
>   
>   For Option 2, there's no explicit intermediate representation of a serialized value, but rather
>   each `Serialize` implementation is explicitly generic over any choice of `S` that implements
>   `Serializer`.
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 4b
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> **Requirement**: The process of serialization should consume as little memory as possible.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 2
> 
> - Option 1 serializes data by first converting a data structure into an intermediate
>   representation, `Value`, and then converting `Value` into the final format. This intermediate
>   data structure consumes memory which is not needed by Option 2, where data is converted directly
>   into the final format.
> 
> ---
> 
> ### 4c
> 
> Select each design option that satisfies the following requirement:
> 
> Requirement: When the same data type is serialized into multiple formats, that should increase the
> size of the compiled binary as little as possible.
> 
> ***Answer:*** 1
> 
> - With Option 1, there's only a single instantiation of `Serialize` that converts a type `T` into
>   a `Value`. Because Option 2 is generic over serializers `S`, then every time `T::serialize` is
>   called with a new `S`, the Rust compiler will monomorphize a new instance of `T::serialize`
>   which would increase the size of the binary by comparison to Option 1.
