# Building a Single-Threaded Web Server

The two main protocols involved in web servers are *Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP)* and
*Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)*. Both protocols are request-response protocols, meaning a
client initiates requests and a server listens to the requests and provides a response to the
client. The contents of those requests and responses are defined by the protocols.

**TCP** is the lower-level protocol that describes the details of how information gets from one
server to another but doesn't specify what that information is. **HTTP** builds on top of TCP by
defining the contents of the requests and responses. It's technically possible to use HTTP with
other protocols, but in the vast majority of cases, HTTP sends its data over TCP. We'll work with
the raw bytes of TCP and HTTP requests and responses.

## Listening to the TCP Connection

The web server needs to listen to a TCP connection. The stdlib offers a `std::net` module that lets
us do this. Listen at the local address `127.0.0.1:7878` for incoming TCP streams, then once it gets
an incoming stream, it'll print `Connection established!`.

```rust
use std::net::TcpListener;

fn main() {
    let listener = TcpListener::bind("127.0.0.1:7878").unwrap();

    for stream in listener.incoming() {
        let stream = stream.unwrap();

        println!("Connection established!");
    }
}
```

We can listen for TCP connections at the address `127.0.0.1:7878` with `TcpListener`. In the
address, the section before the `:` is an IP address representing your computer (this is the same on
every computer), and `7878` is the port. We've chosen this port for two reasons:

1. HTTP isn't normally accepted on this port so our server is unlikely to conflict with any other
   web server you might have running on your machine.
2. 7878 is "rust" typed on a telephone.

The `bind` function in this scenario works like the `new` function; it'll return a new `TcpListener` instance.

- The function is called `bind` because, in networking, connecting to a port to listen to is known
  as "binding to a port."

`bind` returns a `Result<T, E>`, indicating it's possible for binding to fail. e.g., connecting to
port 80 requires administrator privileges (nonadministrators can listen only on ports higher than
1023). So if we tried to connect to port 80 without being an administrator, binding wouldn't work.
Binding also wouldn't work, if we ran two instances of our program and so had two programs listening
to the same port. Because we're writing a basic server, we won't worry about handling these kinds of
errors; instead, we use `unwrap` to stop the program if errors happen.

`incoming` on `TcpListener` returns an iterator that gives us a sequence of streams (streams of type
`TcpStream`). A single *stream* represents an open connection between the client and the server. A
*connection* is the name for the full request and response process in which a client connects to the
server, the server generates a response, and the server closes the connection. As such, we'll read
from the `TcpStream` to see what the client sent and then write our response to the stream to send
data back to the client. Overall, this for loop will process each connection in turn and produce a
series of streams for us to handle.

For now, stream handling consists of calling `unwrap` to terminate the program if the stream has any
errors; if there aren't any errors, the program prints a message. The reason we might receive errors
from `incoming` when a client connects to the server is that we're not actually iterating over
connections. Instead, we're iterating over connection attempts. The connection might not be
successful for a number of reasons, many of which are OS specific. e.g., many OSes have a limit to
the number of simultaneous open connections they can support; new connection attempts beyond that
number will produce an error until some of the open connections are closed.

## Reading the Request

To separate the concerns of first getting a connection and then taking some action with the
connection, we'll start a new function for processing connections. In this new `handle_connection`
function, we'll read data from the TCP stream and print it so we can see the data being sent from
the browser.

```rust
use std::{
    io::{prelude::*, BufReader},
    net::{TcpListener, TcpStream},
};

fn main() {
    let listener = TcpListener::bind("127.0.0.1:7878").unwrap();

    for stream in listener.incoming() {
        let stream = stream.unwrap();

        handle_connection(stream);
    }
}

fn handle_connection(mut stream: TcpStream) {
    let buf_reader = BufReader::new(&stream);
    let http_request: Vec<_> = buf_reader
        .lines()
        .map(|result| result.unwrap())
        .take_while(|line| !line.is_empty())
        .collect();

    println!("Request: {http_request:#?}");
}
```

In `handle_connection`, we create a new `BufReader` instance that wraps a reference to the `stream`.
`BufReader` adds buffering by managing calls to the `std::io::Read` trait methods for us.

`http_request` to collect the lines of the request the browser sends to our server. We collect these
lines in a vector by adding the `Vec<_>` type annotation.

`BufReader` implements the `std::io::BufRead` trait, which provides the `lines` method. `lines`
returns an iterator of `Result<String, std::io::Error>` by splitting the stream of data whenever it
sees a newline byte. To get each `String`, we map and `unwrap` each `Result`. The `Result` might be
an error if the data isn't valid UTF-8, or if there's a problem reading from the stream.

The browser signals the end of an HTTP request by sending two newline characters in a row, so to get
one request from the stream, we take lines until we get a line that is the empty string. Once we've
collected the lines into the vector, we're printing them out so we can take a look at the
instructions the web browser is sending to our server.

## A Closer Look at an HTTP Request

HTTP is a text-based protocol, and a request takes this format:

```
Method Request-URI HTTP-Version CRLF
headers CRLF
message-body
```

The first line is the *request* line that holds information about what the client is requesting. The
first part of the request line indicates the *method* being used, such as `GET` or `POST`, which
describes how the client is making this request. Our client used a `GET` request, which means it is
asking for information.

The next part of the request line is /, which indicates the *Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)* the
client is requesting: a URI is almost, but not quite, the same as a *Uniform Resource Locator
(URL)*. The difference between URIs and URLs isn't important for our purposes in this chapter, but
the HTTP spec uses the term URI, so we can just mentally substitute URL for URI here.

The last part is the HTTP version the client uses, and then the request line ends in a *CRLF sequence*. (CRLF stands for *carriage return and line feed*) The CRLF sequence can also be written as `\r\n`, where `\r` is a carriage return and `\n` is a line feed. The CRLF sequence separates the request line from the rest of the request data. Note that when the CRLF is printed, we see a new line start rather than `\r\n`.

Looking at the request line data we received from running our program so far, we see that `GET` is
the method, / is the request URI, and `HTTP/1.1` is the version.

After the request line, the remaining lines starting from `Host:` onward are headers. `GET` requests
have no body.

## Writing a Response

Responses have the following format:

```
HTTP-Version Status-Code Reason-Phrase CRLF
headers CRLF
message-body
```

The first line is a *status* line that contains the HTTP version used in the response, a numeric
status code that summarizes the result of the request, and a *reason phrase* that provides a text
description of the status code. After the CRLF sequence are any headers, another CRLF sequence, and
the body of the response.

Here is an example response that uses HTTP version 1.1, has a status code of 200, an OK reason
phrase, no headers, and no body:

```
HTTP/1.1 200 OK\r\n\r\n
```

Status code 200 is the standard success response. The text is a tiny successful HTTP response. Let's
write this to the stream as our response to a successful request. From the `handle_connection`
function, remove the `println!` that was printing the request data and replace it with the
following:

```rust
fn handle_connection(mut stream: TcpStream) {
    let buf_reader = BufReader::new(&stream);
    let http_request: Vec<_> = buf_reader
        .lines()
        .map(|result| result.unwrap())
        .take_while(|line| !line.is_empty())
        .collect();

    let response = "HTTP/1.1 200 OK\r\n\r\n";

    stream.write_all(response.as_bytes()).unwrap();
}
```

The new line defines the `response` variable that holds the success message's data. Then we call
`as_bytes` on our response to convert the string data to bytes. The `write_all` method on `stream`
takes a `&[u8]` and sends those bytes directly down the connection. Because the `write_all`
operation could fail, we use `unwrap` on any error result as before.

## Returning Real HTML

Let's implement the functionality for returning more than a blank page. Create the new file
*hello.html* in the root of your project directory (not *src*).

To return this from the server when a request is received, we'll modify `handle_connection` to read
the HTML file, add it to the response as a body, and send it.

```rust
use std::{
    fs,
    io::{prelude::*, BufReader},
    net::{TcpListener, TcpStream},
};
// --snip--

fn handle_connection(mut stream: TcpStream) {
    let buf_reader = BufReader::new(&stream);
    let http_request: Vec<_> = buf_reader
        .lines()
        .map(|result| result.unwrap())
        .take_while(|line| !line.is_empty())
        .collect();

    let status_line = "HTTP/1.1 200 OK";
    let contents = fs::read_to_string("hello.html").unwrap();
    let length = contents.len();

    let response =
        format!("{status_line}\r\nContent-Length: {length}\r\n\r\n{contents}");

    stream.write_all(response.as_bytes()).unwrap();
}
```

We've added `fs` to the `use` statement to bring the stdlib's filesystem module into scope.

We use `format!` to add the file's contents as the body of the success response. To ensure a valid
HTTP response, we add the `Content-Length` header which is set to the size of our response body, in
this case the size of *hello.html*.

Currently, we're ignoring the request data in `http_request` and just sending back the contents of
the HTML file unconditionally. That means if you try requesting *127.0.0.1:7878/something-else* in
your browser, you'll still get back this same HTML response. At the moment, our server is very
limited and doesn't do what most web servers do. We want to customize our responses depending on the
request and only send back the HTML file for a well-formed request to /.

## Validating the Request and Selectively Responding

Right now, the web server returns the HTML in the file no matter what the client requested. Add
functionality to check that the browser is requesting / before returning the HTML file and return an
error if the browser requests anything else. Modify `handle_connection` to check the content of the
request received against what we know a request for / looks like and adds `if` and `else` blocks to
treat requests differently.

```rust
// --snip--

fn handle_connection(mut stream: TcpStream) {
    let buf_reader = BufReader::new(&stream);
    let request_line = buf_reader.lines().next().unwrap().unwrap();

    if request_line == "GET / HTTP/1.1" {
        let status_line = "HTTP/1.1 200 OK";
        let contents = fs::read_to_string("hello.html").unwrap();
        let length = contents.len();

        let response = format!(
            "{status_line}\r\nContent-Length: {length}\r\n\r\n{contents}"
        );

        stream.write_all(response.as_bytes()).unwrap();
    } else {
        // some other request
    }
}
```

We're only going to be looking at the first line of the HTTP request, so rather than reading the
entire request into a vector, we're calling `next` to get the first item from the iterator. The
first `unwrap` takes care of the `Option` and stops the program if the iterator has no items. The
second `unwrap` handles the `Result` and has the same effect as the `unwrap` that was in the `map`.

We than check `request_line` to see if it equals the request line of a `GET` request to the / path.
If it does, the `if` block returns the contents of our HTML file. Otherwise, it means we've received
some other request.

Now let's add code to the `else` block to return a response with the status code 404, which signals
that the content for the request wasn't found. We'll also return some HTML for a page to render in
the browser indicating the response to the end user.

```rust
    // --snip--
    } else {
        let status_line = "HTTP/1.1 404 NOT FOUND";
        let contents = fs::read_to_string("404.html").unwrap();
        let length = contents.len();

        let response = format!(
            "{status_line}\r\nContent-Length: {length}\r\n\r\n{contents}"
        );

        stream.write_all(response.as_bytes()).unwrap();
    }
```

## A Touch of Refactoring

The `if` and `else` blocks have a lot of repetition. They're both reading files and writing the contents of the files to the stream. The only differences are the status line and the filename. Make the code more concise by pulling out those differences into separate `if` and `else` lines that will assign the values of the status line and the filename to variables, and then use those variables unconditionally in the code to read the file and write the response:

```rust
// --snip--

fn handle_connection(mut stream: TcpStream) {
    // --snip--

    let (status_line, filename) = if request_line == "GET / HTTP/1.1" {
        ("HTTP/1.1 200 OK", "hello.html")
    } else {
        ("HTTP/1.1 404 NOT FOUND", "404.html")
    };

    let contents = fs::read_to_string(filename).unwrap();
    let length = contents.len();

    let response =
        format!("{status_line}\r\nContent-Length: {length}\r\n\r\n{contents}");

    stream.write_all(response.as_bytes()).unwrap();
}
```

Now the `if` and `else` blocks only return the appropriate values for the status line and filename
in a tuple; we then destructure to assign these two values to `status_line` and `filename` using a
pattern in the `let` statement.
