## Controlling How Tests Are Run
The default behavior of the binary produced by `cargo test` is to run all the tests in parallel and capture output generated during test runs, preventing the output from being displayed and making it easier to read the output related to the test results.

Some command line options go to `cargo test`, and some go to the resulting test binary. To separate these two types of arguments, you list the arguments that go to cargo test followed by the separator `--` and then the ones that go to the test binary. Running `cargo test --help` displays the options you can use with `cargo test`, and running `cargo test -- --help` displays the options you can use after the separator.

### Running Tests in Parallel or Consecutively
When running multiple tests, by default they run in parallel using threads, meaning they finish running faster and provide feedback quicker. Because the tests are running at the same time, make sure tests don’t depend on each other or on any shared state, including a shared environment, such as the current working directory or environment variables.
- One solution is to make sure each test writes to a different file; another solution is to run the tests one at a time

to not run the tests in parallel or to have more control over the number of threads used, send the `--test-threads` flag and the number of threads you want to use to test the binary:
```
$ cargo test -- --test-threads=1
```
- setting `--test-threads` equal to 1 tells the program not to use any parallelism. Running the tests using one thread will take longer than running them in parallel, but the tests won’t interfere with each other if they share state.

### Showing Function Output
the `--show-output` flag tells Rust to reveal any printed values for successful tests
```
$ cargo test -- --show-output
```

### Running a Subset of Tests by Name
If you’re working on code in a particular area, you might want to run only the tests pertaining to that code. You can choose which tests to run by passing `cargo test` the name or names of the test(s) you want to run as an argument. Consider the following code:
```rust
pub fn add_two(a: i32) -> i32 {
    a + 2
}

#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn add_two_and_two() {
        assert_eq!(4, add_two(2));
    }

    #[test]
    fn add_three_and_two() {
        assert_eq!(5, add_two(3));
    }

    #[test]
    fn one_hundred() {
        assert_eq!(102, add_two(100));
    }
}
```
we can run a single test by passing the name of one of the test functions to `cargo test`. For example, the `one_hundred()` test:
```
$ cargo test one_hundred
```

we can also specify part of a test name, and any test whose name contains the part of that value will be run. For example, running `add_two_and_two()` and `add_three_and_two()`:
```
$ cargo test add
```

### Ignoring Some Tests Unless Specifically Requested
Rather than listing as arguments all tests you do want to run, you can instead annotate the time-consuming tests using the `#[ignore]` attribute to exclude them:
```rust
#[test]
fn it_works() {
    assert_eq!(2 + 2, 4);
}

#[test]
#[ignore]
fn expensive_test() {   <==== this test will be ignored
    // code that takes an hour to run
}
```
but if we want to run only ignored tests, use:
```
$ cargo test -- --ignored
```

---

### Quiz

1. When `running cargo` test with no additional configuration, which of the following actions may not work correctly if done by multiple tests?
#### Answer:
Writing text to a single file. Tests are run in parallel by default, so actions which are not thread-safe (like writing to a single file) may cause a race condition.