## Test Organization
The Rust community thinks about tests in terms of two main categories: unit tests and integration tests. 
- ***Unit tests*** are small and more focused, testing one module in isolation at a time, and can test private interfaces
- ***Integration*** tests are entirely external to your library and use your code in the same way any other external code would, using only the public interface and potentially exercising multiple modules per test

## Unit Tests
The purpose of unit tests is to test each unit of code in isolation from the rest of the code to quickly pinpoint where code is and isn’t working as expected. You’ll put unit tests in the *src* directory in each file with the code that they’re testing. The convention is to create a module named `tests` in each file to contain the test functions and to annotate the module with `#[cfg(test)]`:
```rust
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    #[test]
    fn it_works() {
        let result = 2 + 2;
        assert_eq!(result, 4);
    }
}
```
- attribute `cfg` stands for configuration and tells Rust that the following item should only be included given a certain configuration option
- By using the `cfg` attribute, Cargo compiles our test code only if we actively run the tests with `cargo test`

### Integration Tests
integration tests are entirely external to your library. They use your library in the same way any other code would, which means they can only call functions that are part of your library’s public API. Their purpose is to test whether many parts of your library work together correctly. To create integration tests, you first need a *tests* directory.

We create a tests directory at the top level of our project directory, next to src:
```
adder
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
├── src
│   └── lib.rs
└── tests
    └── integration_test.rs
```
Now enter the following code into *integration_test.rs`:
```rust
use adder;

#[test]
fn it_adds_two() {
    assert_eq!(4, adder::add_two(2));
}
```
- Each file in the tests directory is a separate crate, so we need to bring our library into each test crate’s scope. For that reason we add `use adder;` at the top of the code, which we didn’t need in the unit tests.
- We don’t need to annotate any code in *tests/integration_test.rs* with `#[cfg(test)]`. Cargo treats the tests directory specially and compiles files in this directory only when we run `cargo test`
- if a unit test fails, there won’t be any output for integration and doc tests because those tests will only be run if all unit tests are passing.

To run all the tests in a particular integration test file, use the `--test` argument of `cargo test` followed by the name of the file:
```
$ cargo test --test integration_test
```
- This command runs only the tests in the tests/integration_test.rs file.

### Quiz
1. Which of the following is NOT a good reason to wrap unit tests in `#[cfg(test)] mod tests { ... }`?
#### Answer:
It gives your tests access to private functions. All unit tests in a given file have access to that file's private functions, regardless of being in a `mod tests` or not