## Packages and Crates
A crate is the smallest amount of code that the Rust compiler considers at a time.
- Even if you run `rustc` rather than `cargo` and pass a single source code file, the compiler considers that file to be a crate
- Crates can contain modules, and the modules may be defined in other files that get compiled with the crate

A crate can come in one of two forms: a binary crate or a library crate
1. ***Binary crates*** are programs that compile to an executable file that can be run. Binary crates need to have a function called `main` that defines what happens when the executable runs.
2. ***Library crates*** don’t have a `main` function and don’t compile to an executable file. Instead, they define functionality that will be shared with multiple projects. For example, the `rand` crate provides functionality that generates random numbers.

The ***crate root*** is a source file that the Rust compiler starts from and makes up the root module of your crate

A ***package*** is a bundle of one or more crates that provides a set of functionality. A package contains a Cargo.toml file that describes how to build those crates.
- A package can contain any number of binary crates, but at most only one library crate.
- A package must contain at least one crate, whether that’s a library or binary crate

Cargo follows a convention that `src/main.rs` is the crate root of a binary crate with the same name as the package. Likewise, Cargo knows that if the package directory contains `src/lib.rs`, the package contains a library crate with the same name as the package and `src/lib.rs` is its crate root. Cargo passes the crate root files to `rustc` to build the library or binary.

If a package only contains `src/main.rs`, then it only contains a binary crate. If a package contains `src/main.rs` and `src/lib.rs`, it has two crates: a binary and a library. A package can have multiple additional binary crates by placing files in the `src/bin/` directory: each file will be a separate binary crate.