## Defining Modules to Control Scope and Privacy

### Modules Cheat Sheet
Here is a quick reference on how modules, paths, the `use` keyword, and the `pub` keyword work in the compiler, and how most developers organize their code.

- ***Start from the crate root***: When compiling a crate, the compiler first looks in the crate root file (usually *src/lib.rs* for a library crate or *src/main.rs* for a binary crate) for code to compile.
- ***Declaring modules***: In the crate root file, you can declare new modules; say, you declare a “garden” module with `mod garden;`. The compiler will look for the module’s code in these places:
    - Inline, within curly brackets that replace the semicolon following `mod garden`
    - In the file *src/garden.rs*
    - In the file *src/garden/mod.rs*
- ***Declaring submodules***: In any file other than the crate root, you can declare submodules. For example, you might declare `mod vegetables;` in *src/garden.rs*. The compiler will look for the submodule’s code within the directory named for the parent module in these places:
    - Inline, directly following `mod vegetables`, within curly brackets instead of the semicolon
    - In the file *src/garden/vegetables.rs*
    - In the file *src/garden/vegetables/mod.rs*
- ***Paths to code in modules***: Once a module is part of your crate, you can refer to code in that module from anywhere else in that same crate as long as the privacy rules allow using the path to the code. For example, an `Asparagus` type in the garden vegetables submodule would be found at `crate::garden::vegetables::Asparagus`.
- ***Private vs public***: Code within a module is private from its parent modules by default. To make a module public, declare it with `pub mod` instead of `mod`. To make items within a public module public as well, use `pub` before their declarations.
- ***The `use` keyword***: Within a scope, the `use` keyword creates shortcuts to items to reduce repetition of long paths. In any scope that can refer to `crate::garden::vegetables::Asparagus`, you can create a shortcut with `use crate::garden::vegetables::Asparagus;` and from then on you only need to write `Asparagus` to make use of that type in the scope.

To help illustrate these rules, consider a binary crate called `backyard`.
```
Directory structure:

backyard
├── Cargo.lock
├── Cargo.toml
└── src
    ├── garden
    │   └── vegetables.rs   <--- garden vegetables submodule
    ├── garden.rs           <--- garden module
    └── main.rs             <--- crate root
```
The crate root file `main.rs` contains:
```rust
// Filename: src/main.rs
use crate::garden::vegetables::Asparagus;

pub mod garden;

fn main() {
    let plant = Asparagus {};
    println!("I'm growing {:?}!", plant);
}
```
`pub mod garden;` tells the compiler to include the code in src/garden.rs, which contains:
```rust
// filename: src/garden.rs
pub mod vegetables;
```
now `pub mod vegetables;` tells the compiler to include the code from *src/garden/vegetables.rs* into *src/garden.rs*, whose code is:
```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
pub struct Asparagus {}
```

### Grouping Related Code in Modules
Modules let us organize code within a crate for readability and easy reuse. The code within a module is private by default, and b/c of that, modules allow control of the privacy of items. Private items are internal implementation details not available for outside use (they can't be called through an API). We can choose to make modules and the items within them public, which exposes them to allow external code to use and depend on them.

consider a library crate called `restaurant` that's created using `cargo new --lib restaurant`:
```rust
mod front_of_house {
    mod hosting {
        fn add_to_wait() {}

        fn seat_at_table() {}
    }
    
    mod serving {
        fn take_order() {}
        
        fn serve_order() {}
        
        fn take_payment() {}
    }
}
```
- We define a module with the `mod` keyword followed by `front_of_house`, the name of the module. The body then goes inside curly brackets. Inside the module, we can place other submodules, like hosting and serving. Modules can hold definitions for other items like structs, enums, constants, traits, and functions.

We can group items that are related together by using modules. This way other programmers using our code can navigate it based on those groups, making it easier to understand, find what they're looking for, make any changes, or add new functionality.

As mentioned earlier, *src/main.rs* and *src/lib.rs* are called crate roots. The reason for their name is that the contents of either of these two files form a module named `crate` at the root of the crate’s module structure, known as the module tree. In the case of `restaurants` the module tree looks like:
```
crate
 └── front_of_house
     ├── hosting
     │   ├── add_to_waitlist
     │   └── seat_at_table
     └── serving
         ├── take_order
         ├── serve_order
         └── take_payment
```
This tree shows how some of the modules nest inside one another; for example, `hosting` nests inside `front_of_house`. The tree also shows that some modules are siblings to each other, meaning they’re defined in the same module; `hosting` and `serving` are siblings defined within `front_of_house`. 
- If module A is contained inside module B, we say that module A is the child of module B and that module B is the parent of module A. Notice that the entire module tree is rooted under the implicit module named crate.
- The module tree is like a filesystem’s directory tree. And just like directories in a filesystem, modules organize your code.