## Paths for Referring to an Item in the Module Tree
To call a function within a module tree, we need to know its path. This is the same as the path to some file or directory in a computer's filesystem, except in Rust we use `::` instead of `/` as a separator. A path can take two forms:
1. an ***absolute path*** is the full path to the function (or other item) starting from the crate root.
    - for code from an external crate, the absolute path begins with the crate name
    - for code from the current crate, it starts with the `crate` keyword.
2. A ***relative path*** starts from the current module and uses `self`, `super`, or an identifier in the current module.

Choosing whether to use a relative or absolute path is a decision based on your project, and depends on whether you’re more likely to move an item's definition together with the code that uses the item or separately from it. But our preference in general is to specify absolute paths because it’s more likely we’ll want to move code definitions and item calls independently of each other.

In Rust, all items are private to parent modules by default. If you want to make an item like a function or struct private, put it in a module.
- Items in a parent module can’t use any private items inside it's child modules. BUT, items in child modules can use the items in their ancestor modules. This is because child modules wrap and hide their implementation details, but they see the context in which they’re defined.
    - think of the privacy rules as being like the back office of a restaurant: what goes on in there is private to restaurant customers, but office managers can see anddo everything in the restaurant they operate.

### Exposing Paths with the `pub` Keyword
The `pub` keyword on a module only lets code in its ancestor modules refer to it, not access its inner code. We need to go further and choose to make one or more of the items within the module public as well. 

Think about what items in a module are accessible by an API in terms of the path to said item, whether absolute or relative. To be more specific, does the call to the item have public `pub` access to each component of the path to this item?
- For example, say we have
    ```rust
    // filename: src/lib.rs

    mod foo {
        pub mod a {
            fn baz {
                println!("BAZ");
            }
            
            pub fn bar {
                println!("BAR");
            }
        }
    }
    
    fn baz_or_bar() {
        crate::foo::a::baz();

        crate::foo::a::bar();
    }
    ```
   in the absolute path `crate::foo::a::baz();` there is public access until we reach `baz()` itself since it isn't defined with `pub`. But in the path of `crate::foo::a::bar();` we have public access in each component of the path.
    - Do note though, the only reason there's public access to the `foo` module despite not being defined with `pub` is because `baz_or_bar()` is it's sibling; meaning that siblings defined in the same module scope can refer to each other regardless of if their public or not. 

> #### Best Practices for Packages with a Binary and a Library 
> Recall how a package can have both a *src/main.rs* binary crate root and a *src/lib.rs* library crate root, and how both crates have the package name by default. Typically, packages with both a library and a binary crate have just enough code in the binary crate to start an executable that calls code with the library crate. This lets other projects benefit from the most functionality that the package provides, since the library crate’s code can be shared. <br/><br/>
> The module tree should be defined in *src/lib.rs*. Then, any public items can be used in the binary crate by starting paths with the name of the package. The binary crate becomes a user of the library crate and can only use the public API. This helps you design a good API, you are both author and client

### Starting Relative Paths with `super`
We can construct relative paths that begin in the parent module by using `super` at the start of the path; it's like using `..` to start a filesystem path. For example:
```rust
fn deliver_order() {}

mod back_of_house {
    fn fix_incorrect_order() {
        cook_order();
        super::deliver_order();
    }

    fn cook_order() {}
}
```
- `back_of_house` has a child function `fix_incorrect_order()` that calls it's sibling function `cook_order()` (relative to itself), and then calls `deliver_order()` which is a function that's a sibling to it's parent module. So to access `deliver_order()` from within `back_of_house`, we use the `super` keyword to go to it's parent module `crate` (the crate root).

### Making Structs and Enums Public
Using `pub` on a struct makes the struct public, but it's fields will still be private. To make an arbitrary number of a struct's fields public, use `pub` on it's fields.

On the other hand, using `pub` on an enum makes all of it's variants public as well. This is due to the nature of an enum; it wouldn't make sense to have certain variants public and others private since the point of an enum is to cover any possible variation of a type of value.