## Bringing Paths into Scope with the use Keyword
A shortcut to a path can be created using the `use` keyword once, making it more concise to call certain functions. But this shortcut only applies to the scope in which it is called. Otherwise, a new `use` statement will need to be used or from inside a nested scope we can use `super`.

For example, the function `add_to_wait()` that is nested inside the `front_of_house` modules and then `hosting` submodule:
```rust
mod front_of_house {
    pub mod hosting {
        pub fn add_to_waitlist() {}
    }
}

use crate::front_of_house::hosting;

pub fn eat_at_restaurant() {
    hosting::add_to_waitlist();
}
```
- notice how `use` brings `hosting` to scope using absolute path. but now we can call functions or items inside of `hosting` way easier
- whatever is brought into scope using this method still needs to follow privacy rules

eay we instead made `eat_at_restaurant()` a child of the `customer` module, we would have to either move the `use` statement into the `customer` module scope or use `super::hosting` to access the original `use` statement.

### Providing New Names with the `as` Keyword
We can use an alias to refer to the type of object brought into scope using the `as` keyword. After the path in a `use` statement, we can add `as <alias>`. For example:
```rust
use std::fmt::Result;
use std::io::Result as IoResult;

fn function1() -> Result {
    // --snip--
    Ok(())
}

fn function2() -> IoResult<()> {
    // --snip--
    Ok(())
}
```

### Re-exporting Names with `pub use`
When we bring a name into scope with the `use` keyword, the name available in the new scope is private. To enable the code that calls our code to refer to that name as if it had been defined in that code’s scope, we can combine `pub` and `use`. This technique is called *re-exporting* because we’re bringing an item into scope but also making that item available for others to bring into their scope. For example:
```rust
mod front_of_house {
    pub mod hosting {
        pub fn add_to_waitlist() {}
    }
}

pub use crate::front_of_house::hosting;

pub fn eat_at_restaurant() {
    hosting::add_to_waitlist();
}
```
- Now that this `pub use` has re-exported the hosting module from the root module, external code can now use the path `restaurant::hosting::add_to_waitlist()` instead.

### The Glob Operator
To bring all public items defined in a path to scope, specify that path and follow it with the `*` *glob operator*. For example:
```rust
use std::collections::*;
```
- this statement brings all public items defined in `std::collections` into the current scope